PARADISE
CANTO III
CANTO VIII
CANTO XVIII
CANTO XXVIII
CANTO XIII
CANTO XXIII
CANTO XXXIII
CANTO II
CANTO VII
CANTO XVII
CANTO XXVII
CANTO XII
CANTO XXII
CANTO XXXII
CANTO I
CANTO VI
CANTO XVI
CANTO XXVI
CANTO XI
CANTO XXI
CANTO XXXI
     "Even so glittering and so round," said I,
Seconds his teacher gladly, "Hope," said I,
Sichaeus and Creusa, than did I,
And thanks for that return'd; e'en so did I
Thus absolute Piccarda spake, and I
Converse with me: my will thou seest; and I,
Been e'er unclos'd?" so spake the light; whence I
Thou listen to the arguments, which I
With unlike wings are fledge.  A mortal I
Of seeing, loseth power of sight: so I
So loud, it hath no likeness here: nor I
Is this:  and of Aquinum, Thomas I.
That largeliest of his light partakes, was I,
     "O animals of clay!  O spirits gross I
All gracious aid befriend us; for that I
And murmuring cooes his fondness; thus saw I
Qui judicatis terram.  In the M.
CANTO IV
CANTO XIV
CANTO XXIV
CANTO V
CANTO XV
CANTO XXV
CANTO IX
CANTO XIX
CANTO XXIX
CANTO X
CANTO XX
CANTO XXX
Into the mart from Fesole:  and Giuda
Than water flowing not unto the sea.
And bark, that all the way across the sea
Revisit, nor put out to open sea,
To keep the bark of Peter in deep sea
And a less wonder, then the refluent sea,
Held Laurence firm, or wrought in Scaevola
The water shall be chang'd, that laves Vicena
O favour'd mother!  rightly nam'd Joanna!
Why longer sleepst thou?  Caorsines and Gascona
And hitherward the shore, where thou, Europa!
At the repeated name of Joshua,
Superillustrans claritate tua
I and it sprang; my name on earth Cunizza:
On the clear wave.  Know then, the soul of Rahab
     "Thou know'st, that in the bosom, whence the rib
Ay or the purse, is gentle as a lamb,
To the great supper of the blessed Lamb,
Hold you in mock'ry.  Be not, as the lamb,
Of the fair sheep-fold, where a sleeping lamb
How hard the passage to descend and climb
Created, even in the mother's womb,
Her silence and chang'd look did keep me dumb.
     Whoso laments, that we must doff this garb
As Glaucus, when he tasted of the herb,
The dame, so joyous enter, that the orb
Recorded in the sun, whose liberal orb
Wherein the love, which ruleth o'er its orb,
And entertain them subtly.  Every orb
Another, Xerxes; and Melchisidec
Whose he was wholly, and so call'd him Dominic.
I then was of the lambs, that Dominic
Have I my memory left, e'en by the bad
To reappoint), when its imperial Head,
Of doubt, as much as needed, rais'd my head
Over the garden Catholic to lead
What reason on each side they have to plead,
How salt the savour is of other's bread,
Dissentient, one refus'd his sacred read.
Assail it, but those talons hold in dread,
Who by the tusk will perish: there be read
There amidst Albert's works shall that be read,
When the impregnate air retains the thread,
That cowl them with six shadowing wings outspread?
And pass their own inventions off instead.
     That, in their own land, each one must be clad
For all ungrateful, impious all and mad,
And scatter'd my collected mind abroad.
I saw Bellincione Berti walk abroad
That every counterfeit, who spreads abroad
Your vessel, marking, well the furrow broad
A sudden interruption to his road.
Our intellect is to such depth absorb'd,
Before me either court of heav'n displac'd.
Piccarda, in the tardiest sphere thus plac'd,
To save you.  When by evil lust entic'd,
Much evil, that will come, had never chanc'd.
Barefoot and lean, eating their bread, as chanc'd,
But have through others' merit been advanc'd,
Ennobler of thy nature, so advanc'd
"O ye!  in chosen fellowship advanc'd
Wilt thou this truth more clearly evidenc'd?"
This of the feet in future to be pierc'd,
That have intelligence and love, are pierc'd.
All the world pays for, and in that, which pierc'd
To any wish by justice introduc'd,
Of the Most High.  The two that have ascended,
Already Caponsacco had descended
Thus do these organs of the world proceed,
Still doth the file of Hebrew dames proceed.
For fear the age and dowry should exceed
Thou would'st of theft do charitable deed.
And he offendeth not in word or deed.
Not in reward of meritorious deed,
Was the reply, "that they in very deed
Now, without further help, if with good heed
Attracting with involuntary heed
Did Sextus, Pius, and Callixtus bleed,
Nor may I tell thee more, save that the meed
For highest merit were an ample meed.
Will sink beneath him: such will be his meed."
At the first table.  Modern Shepherd's need
In which the substance, that hath greatest speed,
That in its orb impels ye, fate decreed
Whereto my ready answer stands decreed."
     As Daniel, when the haughty king he freed
The ray, that comes from it.  But as the greed
Finding discordant fortune, like all seed
Your nature, which entirely in its seed
Licence to fight, in favour of that seed,
The leader, under whom on manna fed
Whoso can deem, how fondly I had fed
Unto her young, whom lately she hath fed,
That planet must throughout be void, nor fed
Of Polyhymnia and her sisters fed
With that of Linus, and of Cletus fed:
It cometh to me rather, which is shed
    "Beginning from that hour, when Pallas died
Who for the vineyard, which thou wastest, died,
That, by its outward bright'ning, testified
     "By Beatrice summon'd," he replied,
The love, that did inhabit there, replied:
Precise and unambiguous lore, replied
     I thus inquiring; he forthwith replied:
The angel's once to Mary, thus replied:
By other service may be so supplied,
Approva1 of my wish.  "And O," I cried,
The splendours shot before me, that I cried,
Peer with faint glimmer, doubtfully descried;
For my deliverance apt, hast left untried.
And for this reason he had vainly tried
Had, as I mounted, with my pennon vied.
The gateway, named from those of Pera, led
Leapeth unto its mark; so on we sped
Is Lucia, at whose hest thy lady sped,
Goodliest of all, is by such love inspired,
Which makes me oft to bicker and turn red.
God therefore and the Jews one sentence pleased:
Its state, and who in it were highest seated?"
     "Brother!  no eye of man not perfected,
Into the seventh splendour are we wafted,
Which its smooth fellies made, is now deserted:
Who to the beak is nearest, comforted
Who 'scap'd not envy, when of truth he argued,
And interchang'd their plumes.  Silence ensued,
Confusion to your elements ensued.
Onward my sight their semblances pursued;
The rigid satisfaction.  Then behooved
The ardour of my wish (for so behooved),
Or through division been with vermeil dyed."
That hast such favour in my seed vouchsaf'd!"
If to this man through God's grace be vouchsaf'd
To God, befitting the new grace vouchsaf'd.
That Ubertino of Donati grudg'd
So, as when Marsyas by thy hand was dragg'd
So Beatrice in her semblance chang'd:
So into greater jubilee were chang'd
It may for other substance be exchang'd.
Where pledge of mutual safety was exchang'd,
     Then still abiding in that ensign rang'd,
The nature, from its Maker far estrang'd,
Such was the meed; of lively hope, that wing'd
Behold how vast!  and these our seats so throng'd
Expansive, so that from its womb enlarg'd,
A light of so clear amplitude emerg'd,
Each part of other fitly drawn and urg'd,
The ray, from membrane on to the membrane urg'd;
Is with so vehement affection urg'd,
Enring'd each other; till the seventh reach'd
In the proud Soldan's presence, and there preach'd
Partition of our city first is reach'd
Another of those splendent forms approach'd,
Is but o'erpowered a space, not wholly quench'd:
Thy voyage (to which end I was dispatch'd,
After the milk is taken; so outstretch'd
As upon certain stair it met, and clash'd
Where, on the gulf by stormy Eurus lash'd,
And thus it spake:  "One ear o' th' harvest thresh'd,
"What things are these?"  involuntary rush'd,
My forehead to the light, whence this had breath'd,
Play'd tremulous; then forth these accents breath'd:
     Such were the accents towards my lady breath'd
Of sempiternal roses, bending, wreath'd
Of living radiance play'd, and left me swath'd
Thou of our beams wouldst borrow for thine aid,
The Supreme Good; light, ministering aid,
Or other for him, lest more freight be laid
Judith, Rebecca, and the gleaner maid,
Summoning up each argument to aid;
No satisfaction therefore can be paid
And invocation, but like honours paid
Might try thy patience without better aid.
     Benign Apollo!  this last labour aid,
Beatrice led me; and, "Behold," she said,
Attend, and yield me all thy heart."  He said,
In holy scripture, where the twins are said
They scarce would wait to hear the blessing said.
A splendour gliding; nor, the word was said,
It answer'd:  "From the day, when it was said
Of th' other; so that both have truly said."
Of so fell sacrifice.  Be ye more staid,
Who journey'd on, and knew not whither: so did
That overcame me, seeming (for it did)
Whence she, to whom no work of mine was hid,
Were in some part neglected and made void."
Is no return; unless, where guilt makes void,
If duly weigh'd, that argument is void,
So burn'd the peaceful oriflamb, and slack'd
On his religion.  Then, when numerous flock'd
Excess of light, however pure.  I look'd;
On th' everlasting splendour, that I look'd,
Already of myself aloft I look'd;
In order each, as they appear'd, I mark'd.
And forc'd a passage out: whereat I mark'd
Where those you sprang from, and what years were mark'd
To leave the traces of thy footsteps mark'd!
And 't is moreover most expressly mark'd
To calm my troubled mind, before I ask'd,
And, "Whither is she vanish'd?"  straight I ask'd.
Recover'd; and, well nigh astounded, ask'd
And thou the cause of it hast likewise ask'd.
That thou mayst see, he was a king, who ask'd
The appetite remains, that this is ask'd,
All times are present, I, the whilst I scal'd
Was, through increase of gladness, thus conceal'd;
Thus in the sun-thaw is the snow unseal'd;
What Daniel of their thousands hath reveal'd
Or else its poison.  Here confess reveal'd
That holy pleasure here not yet reveal'd,
And girt the star, and hov'ring round it wheel'd.
Into the second realm.  There I beheld
That onward thence from Gades I beheld
Visiting every step.  Looks I beheld,
The sign, that followeth Taurus, I beheld,
It doth remember me, that I beheld
Hast there thy ken, where all things are beheld
That, whatsoever I had yet beheld,
Of substance and of accident, beheld,
Of this glad being, if thine eyes are held
E'en to the palm, and issuing from the field,
As one who reckons on the blades in field,
Will truck its armour for his lilied shield.
Beside the gospel, other spear or shield,
Wrest it a thousand times; for, if it yield
Bent on the point, at which my vision fail'd:
All ye, who in small bark have following sail'd,
And, by that influence only, so prevail'd
The sons have for the sire's transgression wail'd;
In sudden distance from my sight were veil'd.
Upon thine image, by no covering veil'd."
Glitters; and, With his beauties all unveil'd,
     The brightness, where enclos'd the treasure smil'd,
Were open'd, Gregory at his error smil'd
     She with those other spirits gently smil'd,
Of excellence in creature, pity mild,
     "It is no marvel, if thy fingers foil'd
Bari, and Croton, and Gaeta pil'd,
     O what o'erflowing plenty is up-pil'd
Hither through failure of their vow exil'd.
Whose joy enfolds me: Eli then 't was call'd
By inspiration of God's grace impell'd,
In even motion, by the Love impell'd,
Turn'd to the mark where greater want impell'd,
By it the pride of Arab hordes was quell'd,
     Such was the flow of that pure rill, that well'd
Whereon who feeds hath every wish fulfill'd!
To mind, thy wish may be in part fulfill'd:
That life can teem with; such the burden fill'd
As only care to have their coffers fill'd."
Silenced that lyre harmonious, and still'd
Jocund and blythe, had at their pleasure still'd
To circumscribe his being, as he will'd,
And faith to her:  and, from her bosom, will'd
Against the motions of the heav'n, that roll'd
Rich slope of mountain high, whence heat and cold
     Never was blast from vapour charged with cold,
Breathe up in warbled melodies threefold
In your first childhood?  Tell me of the fold,
In single breath your odours manifold!
Contemplate here the wonder I unfold.
That I the tenour of my creed unfold;
Where springs the pleasant west-wind to unfold
I somewhat further to thy view unfold.
Open thy mind to what I now unfold,
In colour like to sun-illumin'd gold.
That she might serve for purchase of base gold:
In equal scorn of labours and of gold.
Faces had they of flame, and wings of gold;
Making the star seem silver streak'd with gold.
Albeit one, who borders them With gold,
Did set them, like to rubies chas'd in gold;
Florence was by the bullets of bright gold
His convent Peter founded without gold
It moved my smiles: and him in truth I hold
Or ere that work engag'd me, I did hold
And this the cheerful semblance, I behold
Wax more and more resplendent; and, "Behold,"
Bonaventura's life in me behold,
Sometime Latona's daughter we behold,
Swift almost as the heaven ye behold.
Must the desire inflame us to behold
So shalt thou many a famous spirit behold."
No second hath arisen.  Next behold
Devoutly as I may, I pray thee hold
Upon the tablet of your mortal mold,
When nature gave it to inform her mold:
Of fair Ausonia, with its boroughs old,
Of him, but tell it not; "and things he told
"No need thy will be told, which I untold
May'st know to keep the shallows, safe, untold.
Will pardon me for that I leave untold,
Thy voice to satisfy my wish untold,
Look downward, and contemplate, what a world
Wherewith the Romans over-awed the world,
These ended, to that region, where the world
The compact, made with Noah, of the world
All others by my song.  Down through the world
As the great sign, that marshaleth the world
     "The providence, that governeth the world,
The dwellers round about, who with the world
Had not the people, which of all the world
Erewhile perverted well nigh all the world;
When heav'n was minded that o'er all the world
Had I but witness'd order, in the world
What blood the sowing of it in the world
To pour their wished influence on the world;
Though it have brought destruction on the world.
And open proofs of this unto the world
'Go forth and preach impostures to the world,'
(As its remoter circle girds the world)
Of the great Harry, he who, by the world
But, 'gainst an erring and degenerate world,
Who hath remov'd me from the mortal world.
For that, which hither from the mortal world
Was I releas'd from the deceitful world,
Ere the creating of another world,
Discern'd, accruing to this upper world
My wish more earnestly than language could.
Had held as strange a marvel, as ye would
That providence celestial overrul'd,
Then newly, Love!  by whom the heav'n is rul'd,
To call things rightly, be it henceforth styl'd.
And from my bosom had not yet upsteam'd
Of knowledge high, whereby thou art inflam'd,
That he, as I have done rang'd them; and nam'd
With them who blush to hear the bushel nam'd.
O happy father!  Felix rightly nam'd!
     If the grim brood, from Arctic shores that roam'd,
And what the language, which I spake and fram'd
God knows how after that my life was fram'd.
Consider how the human flesh was fram'd,
Of what high worth the vow, which so is fram'd
Without the shadow, whereof late I deem'd
First, in Christ's triumph, of all souls redeem'd:
That spirits to the stars, as Plato deem'd,
Methinks its essence,"--" Rightly hast thou deem'd,"
And, from another, one reflected seem'd,
Of thy ascending up these spheres."  Meseem'd,
Then answer'd with such gladness, that she seem'd
     Straight to the shadow which for converse seem'd
And wheel around their airy lodge; so seem'd
The other bright beatitude, that seem'd
Descended with such speed, it had not seem'd
Was on its rise, but yet so slight esteem'd,
That from their impious worship I reclaim'd
The visive spirits dazzled and bedimm'd;
Who thus in answer spake:  "In him are summ'd,
Thou only to this office wert foredoom'd."
Thou near our city cam'st.  But so was doom'd:
That sun, which erst with love my bosom warm'd
Exalted; so that in their will confirm'd
The beak discourse; and, what intention form'd
Have by his virtue been infus'd, who form'd
Through members different, yet together form'd,
Blest spirit!  quickly be my will perform'd;
Th' avowal, which he led to; and resum'd:
Approach'd the topmost bough, he straight resum'd;
To tread their festal ring; and last the band
Their wavy summits all the fervent band,
Hath two ordain'd, who should on either hand
His own deep calm should brood, to Caesar's hand
In heights empyreal, through Honorius' hand
To Belisarius, with whom heaven's right hand
The sacred chords, that are by heav'n's right hand
Which gave me sov'reignty over the land
Each sure of burial in her native land,
Though of mean state and from a foreign land.
Of Italy, nor distant from thy land,
Are nearly one to Begga and my land,
"I speak, nor what thou wouldst inquire demand;
Resembling one accustom'd to command:
Then, as at shaking of a lighted brand,
E'en so between two deer a dog would stand,
With loss of other object, forc'd me bend
From whence erewhile a firebrand did descend,
Was of corporeal frame, and it transcend
For heretic declension.  To the end
May to our knowledge add, but to the end,
Of that eternal worth, which is the end
Be taken:  for their deeds were to one end.
Which had been fasten'd on him, (he whose end
But answer found from other than I ween'd;
But the high providence, which did defend
His help-mate.  Messenger he seem'd, and friend
That, whatsoe'er has past them, I commend.
The virgin's bosom: so that I commend
Their heavenly banqueting; but when an end
     "But (for the vision hasteneth so an end)
That families fail, when cities have their end.
Near to the limit, where all wishes end,
Be vigilant and clear.  And, to this end,
Whose mortal lives were busied to that end,
In such sort whirl around, that each should tend
Of ancient council with the new conven'd,
Chrysostom, and Anselmo, and, who deign'd
Her mother, and her son, him whom they feign'd
And one to witless indolence resign'd;
Hath each his several degree assign'd.
To whom the keys of glory were assign'd.
Grace and good-will their measure have assign'd.
United, and the foremost rank assign'd.
But such my lot by charity assign'd,
Term by th' eternal counsel pre-ordain'd,
Thou backward fall'st.  Grace then must first be gain'd;
Her infinite sweetness.  Thence mine eyes regain'd
With dazzled eyes, whilst wond'ring I remain'd,
By interchange of splendour.  I remain'd,
Thousand and hundred years and more, remain'd
Was chang'd (that ever as at first remain'd)
And here my brethren, who their steps refrain'd
His knighthood and his privilege retain'd;
That dense and rare were cause.  Here I sustain'd
Of single chiefs, or states in league combin'd
What compensation therefore may he find?
Shall, in the vengeance it dispenseth, find
Attest; as thou by diligent search shalt find
Then look what it hath err'd to, thou shalt find
Excluded, chalice no entrance here may find,
Is loosen'd from this body, it may find
So burly are they grown: and from behind
     I answ'ring, thus; "Thy gentle words and kind,
Toward the lustre, that with greeting, kind
To the first father of your mortal kind,
Made for the dwelling of the human kind
His offspring: whence, below, the human kind
From the Cirrhaean city answer kind.
Of elder time, in their old error blind,
And in your tetchy wantonness as blind,
Spirits, whom fame hath note of.  For the mind
Not for the fault (that doth not come to mind),
And they who gaze, presageful call to mind
Ineffable, whence eye or mind
In these great bodies: nor th' all perfect Mind
Therefore your sight, of th' omnipresent Mind
Justly reveng'd.  But yet I see thy mind
Our resurrection certain, if thy mind
I have, no doubt, instill'd into thy mind,
Bespake me: "Gratefully direct thy mind
The word of gospel lore upon my mind
Such was the image glanc'd into my mind,
Had not a flash darted athwart my mind,
The day-star of mine eyes; then thus subjoin'd:
To the foremention'd lively knowledge join'd,
Escorted, thus preventing me, rejoin'd:
Substance that nature and the human join'd.
Vicissitude of ministry, enjoin'd;
The nature with its Maker thus conjoin'd,
Which passeth from his brightness; not disjoin'd
The spirit of paternal love, enshrin'd,
Beatrice spake:  "O life in glory shrin'd!"
     As embers, at the breathing of the wind,
Then all roll'd upward like an eddying wind.
O Christians, not, like feather, by each wind
Of comet splendour; and as wheels, that wind
     "That man, who was unborn, himself condemn'd,
Grant virtue now to utter what I kenn'd,
In sooth, much aim'd at, and but little kenn'd:
"To each among your tribe, what time ye kenn'd
Prevail'd on thee to break the plighted bond
Intelligence and power, unsever'd bond.
Shall be deliver'd from the adult'rous bond."
The twain, on each hand next our empress thron'd,
For his own folly by himself aton'd.
By Danube wash'd, whenas he strays beyond
T' advance him to the meed, which he had earn'd
Move Maia and Dione; here discern'd
Whence, on the alter, Iphigenia mourn'd
All Paradise survey'd:  when round I turn'd
Had made the leash to take me.  As I turn'd;
     At the sweet sounds of comfort straight I turn'd;
Is veil'd by others' beams."  I said, and turn'd
     "That all the world," said I, "should have bee turn'd
Is liveliest, full of fond desire she turn'd.
"After that Constantine the eagle turn'd
     I straight obey'd; and with mine eye return'd
A reckoning of that just one, who return'd
At sound of the Pompeian trump, return'd.
Then to the beauteous eyes mine eyes return'd.
Ne'er ran, as thou hast hither now return'd."
The way of truth and life, to evil turn'd.
Thence many rivulets have since been turn'd,
And smil'd; then tow'rds th' eternal fountain turn'd.
Like Semele when into ashes turn'd:
Three orbs of triple hue clipt in one bound:
     Never was heart in such devotion bound,
Raise loud the voice, and spring with gladder bound;
The English and Scot, impatient of their bound.
The wild beast, soon as she hath reach'd that bound,
Were utter'd.  But that, ere the lofty bound
Is summ'd; and all, elsewhere defective found,
Many a time his nurse, at entering found
The rest, that to my wond'ring thoughts l found.
That paint through all its gulfs the blue profound
From holy spirits, winging that profound;
And there on mine: where every aim is found
Whence I return, are many jewels found,
Who call 'Christ, Christ,' there shall be many found,
Still in this depth below.  But search around
That I beheld it bick'ring sparks around,
Now low, and now aloft, and now around,
Are princedoms and archangels, with glad round
From which the twice twelve cions gird thee round.
The world.  Then, circle after circle, round
And mark'd, how near him with their circle, round
Said he, "and let the destin'd years come round."
It falleth against nature to the ground;
Lab'ring with such deep counsel.  Wheeling round
With its sev'n kings conqu'ring the nation round;
Seem'd it unto me turn'd from length to round,
Where peace divine inhabits, circles round
Within the temple of his vow, looks round
But gave them truth to build on; and the sound
A lake so broad.  The newness of the sound,
Which lords it o'er me, even at the sound
Of hope the praises in this height resound.
The richness of his spring-head: and as sound
Is, at the wind-hole, modulate and tun'd;
E'en thus, O Jesus, my true Lord and God?
To him.  This wouldst thou hear; how long since God
Resounded all the spheres.  "Praise we one God!"
Near or remote, what there avails, where God
Under the Son of Mary and of God,
Rejoicing in the countenance of God,
Or shown me such similitude of God.
As clock, that calleth up the spouse of God
The world, and with the nearer breath of God
Heav'n's anger less, than when the book of God
Range wide o'er all the pastures.  Arm of God!
Which in the presence of the Son of God
Down unto Mary, when the Son of God
Were all too scant, had not the Son of God
Upon these waters mov'd the Spirit of God.
"The flood," I answer'd, "from the Spirit of God
That all with mutual impulse tend to God.
Dispos'd to render up itself to God,
To your perception, hands and feet to God
"All grappling bonds, that knit the heart to God,
Reflected shine the judgments of our God:
What is by me not hidden."  As a Hood
     But as it chances, if one sort of food
The body's, in variety of food:
Their wished looks, and to bring home their food,
O hidden riches!  O prolific good!
Derivable by no created good,
Created first was blameless, pure and good;
With such effectual working, and the good
To kings, of whom are many, and the good
Good, inasmuch as we perceive the good,
My love for them is great, as is the good
As far as human reason sees, are good,
El was the name on earth of the Chief Good,
Singing, methinks, their bliss and primal good.
For all our good is in that primal good
Into the source and limit of all good,
Whence these our sayings we avouch for good."
The primal will, that in itself is good,
Abandoned himself.  Therefore 't is good
Like to a falcon issuing from the hood,
By his self-humbling, to his brotherhood,
Had it still lack'd of newer neighbourhood.
Of that dark bird which nestles in his hood,
Thy daughter by affinity and blood!
A common sewer of puddle and of blood:
The skillet, that would hold Ferrara's blood,
Who with loud cries was 'spous'd in precious blood,
"Not to this end was Christ's spouse with my blood,
When he perceiv'd his son.  "O thou, my blood!
With Verde mingled, to the salt sea-flood.
More then the tall ship, hurried down the flood,
Its image mirror'd in the crystal flood,
From Var unto the Rhine, saw Isere's flood,
At Argo's shadow darkening on his flood.
Of sore repentance in his sorrowful mood.
As one in slumber held.  Not long that mood
So as thy heart may, in its blithest mood,
There stall them and grow fat.  The o'erweening brood,
Not distant, on the happy coast she stood.
By whom that holiest banner is withstood,
The brief assurance, than I understood
Commended, while they leave its course untrod."
What time from all these empty things escap'd,
When from Ravenna it came forth, and leap'd
Unequal to my theme, as never bard
Mysterious; for his high conception scar'd
Peer'd on that last resplendence, while I heard:
Th' intention is deriv'd."  Forthwith I heard:
And from within it these the sounds I heard.
The speech descended, the first sounds I heard
Of their angelic bells; methought I heard
The way of life was follow'd."  Prompt I heard
Was e'er conceiv'd.  For I beheld and heard
     I turn'd me to Beatrice; and she heard
In earnest of that day, e'en now are heard
Solution of the maze.  What I have heard,
Touching my future destiny have heard
Thus saw I move the glorious wheel, thus heard
Than five-and-twenty ages had appear'd
Drops satiate with the sweetness; such appear'd
And after them, who in the van appear'd,
Erect for speech.  But soon a sight appear'd,
And suddenly upon the day appear'd
Forth on his great apostleship he far'd,
He shall behold thee with such kind regard,
Inflicted by the cross, if thou regard
Which Thomas, ere my coming, hath declar'd
To me had spoken, and my will declar'd,
Reduplicate upon the chequer'd board.
Thou rest a little longer at the board,
Than swine, who diet at his lazy board,
To linger in dull tardiness, compar'd
The happy Callaroga, under guard
So firmly to God's service I adher'd,
This day is mingled with the common herd.
Befalls me to portray, voice hath not utter'd,
     And thus the senior, holy and rever'd:
Brooded the deep serene.  "Father rever'd:
Such floods of gladness on her visage shower'd,
That, virtue sinking in me overpower'd,
Upon the ladder perch'd the sacred bird.
Following gently the impress of the bird.
As rainbow is from rainbow: and the third
From thee alike, and more remote the third.
The lofty rapture from that womb inspir'd,
Which merely are from holy thoughts inspir'd!
Of thy dear brother, who with thee conspir'd
Doth burn and quiver, held so far retir'd
The Decii, and the Fabii hence acquir'd
The other points, both which thou hast inquir'd,
To what intent the eagle of our Lord
Of him, within whose mighty grasp our Lord
Even to wonder, did not the safe word
Impression of his glory, that the Word
And with that family, whom now the cord
Not her alone with sacrifice ador'd
How through this passage to the truth I ford,
Thy mind be with thine eyes: and in them mirror'd
Unto the life, from whence he fell, restor'd:
Eternal: from his voice I learn, whose word
Him, who was born to gird on him the sword,
War once had for its instrument the sword:
Than the blind lamb; and oftentimes one sword
Looking for intimation or by word
The Mantuan mov'd him, still was I debarr'd
The scripture-image, by distortion marr'd.
Favour with thee."  So I my suit preferr'd:
Falls in appearance dwindled and obscur'd,
The isle of fire by old Anchises honour'd
If thou of all the rest wouldst be assur'd,
As the great spirit of Aquinum ceas'd;
Have I with song applausive ever ceas'd
On set conditions: spirits all releas'd,
The burden on his shoulders, unreleas'd
Had op'd lips; so well their answer pleas'd.
Who to such good had destin'd him, was pleas'd
Beatrice in oblivion.  Naught displeas'd
Breathe now; and let the hunger be appeas'd,
Hath plac'd her."  Answering not, mine eyes I rais'd,
Declare thee, What is faith?"  Whereat I rais'd
Delusion opposite to that, which rais'd
The people ever, in Palermo rais'd
In even balance from the zenith pois'd,
Derision, haply thus he hath disguis'd
A second, there is none, to his enclos'd
So far discreetly hath thy lips unclos'd
And speaks not, till the master have propos'd
She chants the loud hosanna:  while, oppos'd
As ever mark to arrow's point oppos'd.
Excell'd in lustre all the front oppos'd.
So shines, that, were no temp'ring interpos'd,
Can roam, hath in such order all dispos'd,
Are ready at thy pleasure, well dispos'd
The love for Him, that held me, it eclips'd
The' eternal might, which, broken and dispers'd
And as a sleep is broken and dispers'd
I other luminaries saw, that cours'd
Lights, scintillating, as they met and pass'd.
When they led on by Hannibal o'erpass'd
So of her act, that through the eyesight pass'd
     "Well I discern," she thus her words address'd,
Bearing its seal immutably impress'd.
The beggar's craft.  The Conti were possess'd
Of light, as through aught rare beside effus'd.
Glow'd in his eye, and o'er his cheek diffus'd,
Unto the virtue through its parts diffus'd.
With so exceeding fondness, as infus'd
Seem'd as reflected splendour, while I mus'd;
And fertile, which that cloister once was us'd
And to the Holy Spirit," rang aloud
At eve or morning, paints and adverse cloud,
Through glance of sunlight, stream'd through broken cloud,
Shall there enact, as doth 1n summer cloud
(Not through Typhaeus, but the vap'ry cloud
Then lov'd her more devoutly.  She, bereav'd
It may be, and the sight be justly crav'd.
And in that midst their sportive pennons wav'd
Nor aught unknown to thee, which it achiev'd
To the true faith recall'd me.  I believ'd
Such as in Christ, or ere he came, believ'd.
It should be e'er imagin'd: yet believ'd
Either for him who gave or who receiv'd
All stretch'd to speak, from whence I straight conceiv'd
With pleasure, from the Holy Spirit conceiv'd,
His virtue growing; I e'en thus perceiv'd
And, in himself, all, who since him have liv'd,
Now knoweth he, how all the ill, deriv'd
And in each one was heard:  "Lo!  one arriv'd
Began to wheel, nor yet had once revolv'd,
     "O plant!  from whence I spring! rever'd and lov'd!
Of its reality.  The guide belov'd
As thy own laurel claims of me belov'd.
Might keep her footing towards her well-belov'd,
Mothers and sires, and those whom best they lov'd,
His glory, by whose might all things are mov'd,
Fix'd upon her, from upward gaze remov'd
Before baptizing.  O how far remov'd,
Thou, notwithstanding, all deceit remov'd,
Hath from itself, the chief Good, ne'er been mov'd.
Who had erewhile for me his station mov'd;
(E'en as the eyes by quick volition mov'd,
And with thin ranks, after its banner mov'd
And in like guise was Adam's spirit mov'd
Those penmen, whom the Holy Spirit mov'd
To save them: those first ages past, behoov'd
From Paradise, because it had eschew'd
Shouldst be confronted, so that having view'd
So I, the whilst she said, awe-stricken bow'd.
Calabria's abbot, Joachim , endow'd
Within, there is the lofty light, endow'd
So passing lovely, Beatrice show'd,
Fast-knit to Christ; and the first love he show'd,
By him of Pressa:  Galigaio show'd
Was or can be.  For God more bounty show'd.
And through the living light so lustrous glow'd
Was tardier in motion; and that glow'd
Where erst it was, had turn'd; and steady glow'd,
Had left.  That other joyance meanwhile wax'd
Its shining. And one ling'ring near us, wax'd
By thought on thought arising sore perplex'd,
As one by over-eagerness perplex'd:
Which, so intent to mark it, held me fix'd,
Collected, on the goodliest ardour fix'd.
But then the citizen's blood, that now is mix'd
On every side the living flame decay'd.
Thou know'st, and how: and knowing hast allay'd
Were, in my eyeballs lively portray'd,
From that blest ardour, soon as it was stay'd:
(When he was bidden 'Ask' ), the motive sway'd
Throughout the mortal kingdom which it sway'd,
Hath on the mantle of thick vapours prey'd;
Of seraphim he who is most ensky'd,
To Simifonte, where his grandsire ply'd
     "Both scriptures, new and ancient," I reply'd;
Now in his word, sole, ruminating, joy'd
Who musing, in the world that peace enjoy'd,
Appearance, still new miracles descry'd,
The voice which had dispers'd my fear, when daz'd
Intent on her, that charm'd him, Bernard gaz'd
Fair governance was yet an art well priz'd
Of goodness, and in his account most priz'd,
Was Malta's bar unclos'd.  Too large should be
His true opinion.  If his meaning be,
Or ever death his fated term prescribe;
Is in that gladsome harbour, to our tribe
His father-in-law should yoke him to its tribe.
Through all the seven spheres, and saw this globe
The other worthily should also be;
Whom Christ in his own garden chose to be
And drives away the nurse.  Nor may it be,
Would their effect so work, it would not be
Was kindled, as I gaz'd.  It may not be,
Another could endure, which needs must be
Forerun the asking.  Whatsoe'er may be
With him compos'd the world to such a peace,
Did bare his feet, and, in pursuit of peace
This flower to germin in eternal peace!
Was chaste and sober, and abode in peace.
As one, who fain would speak yet holds his peace,
And having told the errand keeps his peace;
And from the martyrdom came to this peace."
Comes to the eye: such saw I many a face,
     So said, she turn'd toward the heav'n her face.
For I have mark'd it, where all time and place
I should forecast, that driven from the place
That here exceeds our pow'r; thanks to the place
Are happy, long ye for a higher place
For light'ning scap'd from its own proper place
And shall for ever hold them to their place,
Who deign'st, for me, to quit the pleasant place,
All in like manner change with me.  My place
Part the nice level; e'en so brief a space
Of their perfection void, so long a space.
Whose lowest step embosoms such a space
On th' other, where an intersected space
And Beatrice, that a little space
To have its scepter wielded by a race
Was on its height frequented by a race
Christ and his followers; but found the race
I should unlock the waters.  "May the grace,
Stood lively before me.  "Child of grace!"
Suppliant to thee he kneels, imploring grace
And without boasting, so God give him grace."
The Tuscan air; and afterward, when grace
To, have struggled in the womb.  Therefore, as grace
The Sun of angels, him, who by his grace
The other, through the riches of that grace,
Affection fails me to requite thy grace
Had div'd unto the bottom of my grace
Was worn away, or ever Nimrod's race
"Here is the goal, whence motion on his race
To yield the shepherd room, pass'd o'er to Greece,
Shall find his avarice there and cowardice;
And for a proof th' effect may well suffice.
The shepherd of the church let this suffice
Its powers of apprehension, memory, choice;
Many, who now are weeping, would rejoice,
Of one amongst the new lights mov'd a voice,
Who was chief shepherd, he with warning voice
Who had so largely promis'd, and with voice
Her words resum'd, in gesture and in voice
A sparkle is distinct, or voice in voice
And us their centre: yet more sweet in voice,
Beholding pale and breathless, with her voice
Was found unmov'd at rumour of his voice,
Attendant on some skilful songster's voice
From that within (in manner of that voice
All rest; the flamy circle at that voice
May be contended fully, let thy voice,
Set down with faithful pen!  let now thy voice
Only to yield thee gladness of my voice,
Soon as my peace I held, compass'd me thrice
Those burning suns that circled round us thrice,
Unbounded, bounding all, each spirit thrice
Again mine eyes were fix'd on Beatrice,
Follow'd of him, who severs it and justice:
In faithful mirror the celestial Justice,
The close proportion.  Hence doth heav'nly justice
That with no costlier viands than the juice
Four thousand and three hundred rounds and twice,
Of that true constellation, and the dance
And enters on the mazes of the dance,
Then seem'd they like to ladies, from the dance
Wheel'd, as became their rapture.  In the dance
Revolving; and the rest unto their dance
Great flame hath risen: after me perchance
Desire of their dead bodies; yet perchance
Art, but destruction; and this may not chance,
Thus oft are seen, with ever-changeful glance,
So stood the dame erect, and bent her glance
My sight upon her blissful countenance,
Doth represent with human countenance
And none left desolate a-bed for France!
"Is of the joy to come a sure expectance,
Beating thy pennons, thinking to advance,
Relenting mercy, large munificence,
Made mere abortion: faith and innocence
In early times with their own innocence
May well be such, to that without offence
Who, willing to give proof of diligence,
That Esau is so wide of Jacob:  hence
Jove's tempering 'twixt his sire and son; and hence
It ne'er is cancell'd if not kept: and hence
As each is wider from the centre.  Hence,
The more below his triumph, who from hence
Or even thou advance thee further, hence
Thus more than thousand twinkling lustres hence
To soar up thither, let him look from thence
Surpasseth power of him who comes from thence;
Believing it to have been taken thence,
Let not Dame Birtha and Sir Martin thence
From Acquasparta nor Casale, whence
Pass through, there needs must be a limit, whence
The better disclose his glory: whence
     Soon, as the saintly spirit, by his silence,
Are different in their shares of excellence.
It would not lack supply of excellence.
Thou canst not doubt its fellow's excellence,
As nature doth in fire, tho' violence
What reason that another's violence
     After mine eyes had with meek reverence
Unto eternity, and out of Florence
Were to her beauty nothing.  Its boon influence
One, of the other great and glorious prince,
The County Guido, and whoso hath since
And he, who had to her descended, once,
Preserve it; yet not bent, as Jephthah once,
Predestin'd, we are carried by the force
Of every beauty work with quicker force,
So pitiful of semblance, that perforce
But that its tendency doth prompt perforce
I spake erewhile so strictly of its force.
Or more or less, so far it follows force.
Enliven'd by that warmth, whose kindly force
Some less approaching to their primal source.
The city's malady hath ever source
Of him, who hears, is loth to acquiesce
Moving, with seed or without seed, produce.
That I should look aloft: but, ere he bade,
As the mind saddens, murkier grows the shade.
The same in all, an holocaust I made
Of diverse voices is sweet music made:
The saintly creatures flying, sang, and made
Of the mid circle can, by art, be made
Here eve was by almost such passage made;
In heav'n, such as Ariadne made,
Thus when and where these spirits of love were made,
When both our parents at the first were made."
Or from its straightness warp'd: no reck'ning made
If e'er the sacred poem that hath made
If that, whereof thou hast oblation made,
Gabriel, and Michael, and him who made
With the sun's flame, that rain or flood ne'er made
Those saintly lights attended, happier made
In your old baptistery, I was made
Which thou hast nam'd, and what of them is made,
Consisteth; one is that, whereof 't is made,
O'erpower us, in corporeal organs made
The only fords were left through which to wade,
Yet shows the semicircle void, abide
Returning, cross their flight, while some abide
And leaf unwith'ring, blessed spirits abide,
Return below, open thy lips, nor hide
That doubly seest in every wedded bride
And follow both the bridegroom; so the bride
Than to do fitting honour to the bride;
How mighty them I saw, whom since their pride
This petty area (o'er the which we stride
Of my great offices still laid aside
The gospel and great teachers laid aside,
Pale January must be shor'd aside
The counterfeited semblance thrown aside;
Melissus, Bryso, and the crowd beside,
Will by thy reasoning be destroy'd.  Beside,
So feelingly, each argument beside
My sight directed, and on either side
From hence, had seem'd a moon, set by its side,
Mourn for their heavy yoke.  Upon that side,
I saw instead a senior, at my side,
Incredible how fair; and, from the tide,
From its reach sever'd them: whereat the guide
Whenas the wheel which thou dost ever guide,
The old and new, is yours: and for your guide
     O Beatrice!  sweet and precious guide!
To do the bidding of my heav'nly guide:
Measur'd itself by none, it doth divide
Touches the sun; so saw I there stream wide
So that they needs into strange pastures wide
Enwheeling, sweep their ampler circuit wide.
     "And hence thou mayst by inference conclude
"That thou at length mayst happily conclude
That with a ken of such wide amplitude
Of ample radiance!  Yet, nor amplitude
Hover'd the brink of dread infinitude.
I saw the splendours in such multitude
Before my view the saintly multitude,
To this perceptible hath lifted thee."
To recompense, who sees and can reward thee.
T' have ta'en thy stand apart shall well become thee.
Been longer on the earth, the love I bare thee
had wrought, since thus the shout had pow'r to move thee.
Has spread to utmost amplitude.  Of thee
"Against the virtue, that o'erpow'reth thee,
Not to lose pity.  On this point bethink thee,
If with thy mountainous girdle thou wouldst arm thee
"How contrary desires each way constrain thee,
Thou smiledst; on that circling, which in thee
What is that hope, how it doth flourish in thee,
And meanwhile rest assur'd, that sight in thee
In heav'n itself, but make my vaunt in thee!
And cold, that cover'd it before, so thee,
Erroneous so must prove what seem'd to thee.
Of those, whom I erewhile accus'd to thee,
Is founded every virtue, came to thee."
The glorious Spirit, of whom I speak to thee,
This for their sphere, but for a sign to thee
For this there only have been shown to thee,
The vengeance were already known to thee,
Are that they purport?  None hath sworn so to thee."
This treasure, such as I describe it to thee,
To think my gladness manifest to thee,
That a few circling seasons hide for thee!
For they of weighty matter shall possess thee.
Thou reach, expectance may not weary thee,
Say, who that angel is, that with such glee
Distinct, and quaint adornment. At their glee
As till our number equal the decree
Thus far from round to round.  So heav'n's decree
And I, to own myself convinc'd and free
They from corruption had been therefore free.
Whatever thence immediate falls, is free,
Love no compulsion needs, but follows free
The meed, as unto each in due degree
Hosannas blending ever, from the three
Where for its sake were met the rival three;
Thou shalt behold me of thy favour'd tree
Th' ideal stamp impress: so that one tree
     "I see, thou sayst, the air, the fire I see,
Thou holdst most certain: for that will I see
She cry'd, "at this my smiling, when I see
On upward gazing, said, "Look down and see
The halter of Jerusalem shall see
From Egypt to Jerusalem, to see.
When, looking at my side again to see
Who haply from Croatia wends to see
But this is not.  Therefore remains to see
For, Beatrice, when I thought to see,
To what I answer thee; and thou shalt see
Which in the final judgment thou shalt see."
     She then resum'd:  "Thou certainly wilt see
Enough of that, which the world cannot see,
Be chang'd; for, while I speak, these shalt thou see
Forerun the asking.  With him shalt thou see
And strives with searching ken, how he may see
     As here we sometimes in the looks may see
His words: and what he taught, now plainly see,
"On this fifth lodgment of the tree, whose life
"Exalted worth and perfectness of life
To bring Rome in unto the way of life,
With ye the parent of all mortal life
O'erspeedy comers to immortal life,
Grow not of different duties in your life?
In twofold vesture; and their proper lands this delicious life.
That luminary, in which the wondrous life
Had drawn the veil from off our pleasant life,
Both from experience of this pleasant life,
Most high above the waters, all my life,
But for the purchase of this happy life
The nations shall take note.  His unripe age
Lay sick in grievous error many an age;
Upon Ostiense and Taddeo's page,
Of holy transport had so spent its rage,
Ended within me. Beck'ning smil'd the sage,
A third; and he a fourth, whose airy voyage
'1 have done ill,' than to redeem his pledge
These hundred years and more, on its first ledge
On that maim'd stone set up to guard the bridge,
O mortal men!  be wary how ye judge:
     "Let not the people be too swift to judge,
With over-heavy burden.  "Sith our Liege
Of beauty in that wonder.  Like the change
The sight may without harm endure the change,
And to mine eyes so sudden was the change,
Words may not tell of that transhuman change:
Naught absent is nor hid: where then no change
Though leave were giv'n them, as thou know'st, to change
Whose leaves or white or dusky never change,
Whom nature hath made apt for every change!
Infatuate, who from such a good estrange
And what I deem is truth how just revenge
And on Pharsalia with so fierce a plunge,
And the blind bull falls with a steeper plunge,
As their just heritage, he gave in charge
From Bagnororegio, one, who in discharge
Let thy upsoaring vision range, at large,
Thus closely with thee longer, take at large
With whirling speed; and gladness was the scourge
Be palpable, and proof apparent urge."
The Emperor Conrad; and his knighthood he
That make the circle of the vision, he
Are order'd, looking for a sign: whence she,
That pleader for the Christian temples, he
Nor aught avail'd, that, with Amyclas, she
Unfathomable, to the end that she,
Enter into my bosom, and there breathe
Did carry.  Then the season come, that he,
Remote and tempting, first a man might die
Blest there.  The limbs, whence it was driven, lie
Experience, if thereof thou trial make,
Henceforth be led unto thy feet, to make
The influence of their dew."  Whileas I spake,
Was painted in my looks; and thus I spake
With that excess, to converse urg'd, and spake:
Saw me in anxious thought suspense, and spake:
Whence flows what most he craves."  Beatrice spake,
     Such were the words that Beatrice spake:
I understood not, so profound he spake;
So I, in silence, arm'd me, while she spake,
The mighty charge was given."  Thus she spake,
Soothes him, and he is cheer'd; for thus she spake,
Or ere that longing be allay'd."  So spake
Yet in his smile apparent; and thus spake:
Transparent, when to pleasure me it spake:
Acquires more pleasure; so, the whilst it spake,
O fair Clemenza, of the treachery spake
That of her laughing eyes the radiance brake
At each new minist'ring.  Then silence brake,
That thou shouldst answer me; but for her sake,
Acceptable to God: and, for its sake,
For want of tenting."  Thus she said:  "But take,"
And heav'n was open'd, though the earth did quake.
Two arches parallel, and trick'd alike,
That as their warfare was alike, alike
Without distinction, in each case alike
Glow'd Belus' daughter, injuring alike
Of two fierce wolves, in dread of both alike:
The thirsting pride, that maketh fool alike
To hearing and to sight grateful alike,
Of so deep stain, that never, for the like,
Which doth disfranchise him, and make unlike
And when the words were ended, not unlike
Followed from either choir, as plainly spoke
Of that fair flower, whom duly I invoke
Of Catalonia might not work his bale.
The failure of his vows, that in your scale
Ne'er yet was run: Minerva breathes the gale,
Arose and set, when I did first inhale
Of gladness everlasting!  that exhale
Forth snatch'd me from the pleasant cloister's pale.
When at his daughter's birth the sire grew pale.
If thou didst miss the sequel of my tale,
To mine eyes, that upward, as from vale
Where was before th' horizon.  Of that vale
Left by his reason free, and variable,
Giving himself to make man capable
     Mine eye, that far as it was capable,
Joy past compare, gladness unutterable,
And whence they hither came, more honourable
As not to make the' offence excusable.
From everlasting, irremovable.
It once was, now is grown unsightly bramble."
Would in itself be such a miracle,
Christ said not to his first conventicle,
Yield me again some little particle
All heav'n is mov'd, himself unmov'd the while.
Could but the vulgar catch a glimpse the while
Shall turn 'gainst thee:  but in a little while
Becoming of these signs, a little while
     So said I to the brightness, which erewhile
Of Bede, and Richard, more than man, erewhile,
The strife of aching vision.  As erewhile,
Which in his own blood Christ espous'd.  Meanwhile
Tempting the sweet with bitter:  she meanwhile,
Did Beatrice's silence hold.  A smile
Beatrice suffer'd:  she, with such a smile,
Was the reply:  "and what forbade the smile
That next resplendence issues from the smile
E'en so remembrance of that witching smile
Translated:  for the star, with warmer smile
My song might shadow forth that saintly smile,
Things, that empower thee to sustain my smile."
What change in thee the song, and what my smile
Was in itself the cause of that exile,
Nor Jove's son, when the charms of Iole
That, when my spirit, which thou madest whole,
As nearest stars around the fixed pole,
     As leads the galaxy from pole to pole,
All intellectual creatures, and them sole
But that my vision quickening, in that sole
If in this wondrous and angelic temple,
O how much better were it, that these people
Reversal of their lot to many people,
One motion, one impulse, with those who rule
By force or sophistry aspir'd to rule;
One stretches and another cramps its rule.
None lifts his foot from earth: and hence my rule
E'en as set down by the unerring style
In brightness, and in semblance such became,
At her aspect, such inwardly became
Without a single suitor, till he came.
To multiply our loves!" and as each came
From bad to worse it shifted.--Cephas came;
To those celestial lights, that tow'rds us came,
The sun-beam glow'd that to mine eyes it came
On better judgment: thus the saintly came
And in the song it mingled.  And the dame
Turn'd me toward him; then unto my dame
The fountain whence your arts derive their streame.
Will, as 't is ever wont, affix the blame
And, in believing, nourish'd such a flame
Excelling, saw I issue forth a flame
Unequal to pursue the crowned flame,
Soon as its final word the blessed flame
     Such cheering accents from the second flame
To exercise his wit."  So breath'd the flame
Ere they were made imperishable flame.
That we had entered there.  And as in flame
That now bears mine: for not with fiercer flame
The grace, whence true love lighteth first his flame,
Between the man and fountain, amorous flame.
Look therefore of the cross:  he, whom I name,
But brief contingencies:  for so I name
     Within the crystal, which records the name,
To my o'erlabour'd sight: when at the name
Of that place, say Ascesi; for its name
Took up the strain, and echoed Mary's name.
This precious jewel, let me hear thy name."
That quadrants in the round conjoining frame.
And reason in some sort discerns the same,
"Love for the virtue which attended me
The wolves set on and fain had worried me,
Forth of the beamy flame which dazzled me,
Saw wherefore I was silent, prompted me
Whence truly sprang the wrath that banish'd me;
The other following, with the laws and me,
Then eagerness to speak embolden'd me;
Whenas that gracious boon was proffer'd me,
     Me doubt possess'd, and "Speak," it whisper'd me,
And, shrouded so in splendour answer'd me,
Thence priz'd of me the more.  Glad thou hast made me.
But he, who thinks how ponderous the theme,
For to that honour thou, and my high theme
     Thus of those piteous spirits one bespake me;
May to herself apply.  From her, like me
In its disposing influence supreme,
The songs of the Supreme, himself supreme
As unto gods!" --"How in the light supreme
Both verb and noun all blazon'd; and the extreme
"Who turn'd his compass on the world's extreme,
Who now is sainted, lighten'd her of me
As I toward the water, bending me,
Escap'd; and, in her vesture mantling me,
Here is the reas'ning, that convinceth me
To whom whate'er of genius lifteth me
O reader!  to the lofty wheels, with me,
To him, who subtilizes thus with me,
Against the noontide heat.  And as the chime
Their being, on which credence hope sublime
As, at the birth of morn, the eastern clime
     "The angels, O my brother!  and this clime
Again his scatter'd people.  In that clime,
Our ladder reaches even to that clime,
Of union absolute, which, many a time,
From human to divine had past, from time
So suddenly from good to better, time
Yet cloak thou art soon shorten'd, for that time,
Had God to Ema giv'n thee, the first time
No peril of removing thee from me.
Old tales of Troy and Fesole and Rome.
Stood in mute wonder 'mid the works of Rome,
And other most selected parts of Rome,
Through Scipio the world's glory unto Rome,
Whom she was heavy with, this fire had come,
     No sooner to my list'ning ear had come
Void of its family; nor yet had come
So I beheld the new effulgence come
"Forth from the last corporeal are we come
To God, through whom to this first star we come."
To the redemption of mankind to come;
Until it pleas'd the Word of God to come
Sole understood, past, present, or to come!
With faith in either view, past or to come,
Anticipative of the feast to come;
The kingdom of the heavens, and overcome
Of warfare, hence permitted he is come,
The roots, from whence your operations come,
Augustas hail'd, to Italy must come,
All they, who look'd to Christ already come.
The stragglers wander, so much mole they come
Nor all it wrought, by Roman worthies home
Some speed their way a-field, and homeward some,
Are mortal: but mortality in some
Dream, though their eyes be open; reckless some
Of the meek man of God was told to me;
So from the lights, which there appear'd to me,
For confessor," said I, "vouchsafe to me
My Lady, full of gladness, spake to me:
Of lofty praises; for there came to me
I well remember, did befall to me,
     So, by that form divine, was giv'n to me
Begirt thee.  Thou dost deem thy thoughts to me
And such a speeding grace shone over me,
To hearken; ye the doubt that urges me
Were satisfied to know the lot awaits me,
From whose fair height my lady's eyes did lift me,
Was worthiest.  The celestial love, that spume
Doth from the vision, that reflects the scene.
Such as the youth, who came to Clymene
     As oft along the still and pure serene,
Save that which cometh from the pure serene
Selected, that, with lively ray serene,
Unto that top.  The next for Charlemagne
Under its wings victorious, Charlemagne
And master to me:  Albert of Cologne
Apollo guides me, and another Nine
Or in its limn'd resemblance, can combine
With his adulterate money on the Seine,
O'ercome the massiest air:  thereto imagine
From Campi and Certaldo and Fighine,
I saw the daughter of Latona shine
My gladness hides thee from me, which doth shine  .
A light to stand, that on the three shall shine,
So much the restless eagerness to shine
    There is in heav'n a light, whose goodly shine
The mighty Baptist that way marks the line
To move along the sunbeam, whose slant line
Or silver; I with pray'rs and fasting mine;
That blessed spirit; and I fed on mine,
Was lighted such a smile, I thought that mine
He who usurps on earth (my place, ay, mine,
This star o'ercame me.  Yet I naught repine,
Such one, as hath become a Florentine,
To set the goodly plant, that from the vine,
     Whence I to her replied:  "Something divine
Did rest them, and were mute.  O nymph divine
Place in this heav'n is none, the soul divine,
All mov'd around.  Except the soul divine,
Whenas I turn'd me, pleasure so divine
Forth from his limbs unsheath'd.  O power divine!
This garden through: for so, by ray divine
Who from his phial should refuse thee wine
In leathern girdle and a clasp of bone;
From hence is distant; and the shadowy cone
To do what they had gladly left undone,
Is holy, and that nothing there is done
Who are the cause of all your ills.  The one
And where Cagnano meets with Sile, one
Concentrate, and God's will and ours are one."
Of formal principles, and these, save one,
Through the vast sea of being, and each one
Which kindleth them, decreed.  And when each one
     They of the circle to that point, each one.
To joyous mood, that through the covering shone,
Are all combin'd in thee.  Here kneeleth one,
And of the spirit humbly sued alone
Did make provision, thorough grace alone,
In this our blessed cloister, shine alone
By both his ways, I mean, or one alone.
If rare or dense of that were cause alone,
So hidden, they have in belief alone
No limit, measur'd by itself alone.
The truth thou lov'st, that thou henceforth alone,
Well I discern, that by that truth alone
Nor demonstration physical alone,
Of charity, who makes us will alone
Created, that in seeing him alone
Our hearts, whose high affections burn alone
And I began: "O fruit!  that wast alone
The light eternal, which to view alone
First, singing, to their notes they mov'd, then one
Three Persons in the Godhead, and in one
In mystic union of the Three in One,
On each side just proportion.  House was none
But hidden through its deepness.  Light is none,
     "Thou, to abate thy wonder, note that none
To raise ye up, was fain to leave out none,
And they together cluster'd into one,
Itself unalterable and ever one.
Suspense and wand'ring, I became as one,
Into the wondrous flood; from which, as one
I therefore por'd upon the view.  As one
Follow'd yet other two.  And every one,
To Raymond Berenger, and every one
That the circumference were too loose a zone
Down to the Sabines' wrong to Lucrece' woe,
And visited the nether world of woe,
That inasmuch as there is fear of woe
Within its proper ray the saintly shape
Of cistern, at the fret-board, or of pipe,
     "What following and in its next bearer's gripe
Perfect, entire, and for fulfillment ripe.
And with glad triumph deck th' ethereal cope.
That fledg'd my cheek: nor she of Rhodope,
In whom desire is waken'd, and the hope
Among her sons, not one more full of hope,
Among his tuneful brethren.  'Let all hope
Came back unto his bones.  Of lively hope
Be this reported; that none henceforth dare
Midway the twain compartments, none there are
Paying with unstamp'd metal for their fare.
With its own matter; or, as bodies share
With hope, that leads to blissful end; declare,
Therefore entreat I, father!  to declare
She should remain a trophy, to declare
Are short.  But what thy own thought is, declare."
Seems different, and not from dense or rare.
Is caus'd, I deem, by bodies dense or rare."
I call created, as indeed they are
A third time thus it spake; then added:  "There
I shape mine answer, which were ended here,
So that she seems to contradict me here.
Thou wilt confess not possible, if here
Timely for food of angels, on which here
Hath ever travel'd?  Such are they dwell here,
Pent with the world's incumbrance.  Those, whom here
Here is Macarius; Romoaldo here:
Is easier.  Yet inform me, ye, who here
All sinister aim.  Illuminato here,
Its proper semblance; thus this circling sphere
From the deep spirit, that moves its circling sphere,
Till from that verge, each, changing hemisphere,
When, disappearing, from our hemisphere,
And whiteness had o'erspread that hemisphere,
Of rapt devotion ev'ry lower sphere?"
Angelical, disporting in their sphere.
Thou dost unbind me from that beauteous sphere."
     "Brother!"  he thus rejoin'd, "in the last sphere
Shall from thy presence gild the highest sphere."
Doth, by the rolling of her heav'nly sphere,
So that our wishes rest for ever here.
Her never dying fire.  My wishes here
Toward the sepulchre?  thy will is here,
Due to the poet's temples: for I there
In bright pre-eminence so saw I there,
Though veil'd themselves in shade; so saw I there
Who of this light is denizen, that here
Descending other lights, that rested there,
Of Simois revisited, and there
Bestow'd me, call'd on with loud cries; and there
Contrive, and will ere long effectuate, there,
Its temper and impression.  Morning there,
Grav'd in that streaky fire.  Who painteth there,
Inward so far, it makes meridian there,
May at God's pleasure work amendment here."
     Whatever melody sounds sweetest here,
Is born on Indus' banks, and none is there
Upon the sun.  Much is allowed us there,
The higher they are ris'n; and that there
For all the good, that will may covet, there
To the third circle from the highest, there
A lustre over that already there,
So bright, as none was left more goodly there.
Hath power, directed thus, to bend elsewhere;
Where is the justice that condemns him?  where
And providence have wrought thus quaintly.  Here
Thy finger in the fire, than I was, ere
To slake thy thirst, no less constrained were,
Christian at once and Cacciaguida; as were
Suffice of my forefathers: who they were,
And Agostino join me:  two they were,
Or early, at her pleasure; for they were
Apt utterance for my thoughts!" then added:  "Sire!
As iron that comes boiling from the fire.
Betwixt the heav'n and earth."  Like to the fire,
This to the lunar sphere directs the fire,
That rose and sought its natal seed of fire;
There wheel'd about the point a circle of fire,
At nightfall, glides a sudden trail of fire,
Our wages with the merit; and admire
By vicious fondness.  Thou no more admire
From admiration deep, but now admire
These once a mortal view beheld.  Desire
What we possess, and nought beyond desire;
E'en in that region of unwarp'd desire,
And she hath power to reach it; else desire
To thee for aidance, fain would have desire
Abates in him the keenness of desire,
The sun in his eclipse, and, through desire
And that great light, inflam'd me with desire,
That the true light, which fills them with desire,
Whereon to look fulfilleth all desire.
For that, so near approaching its desire
Urging with sacred thirst of sweet desire,
It happen'd.  Silent was I, yet desire
And thou shalt see what vehement desire
Of that idea, which our Soverign Sire
Fourth family of the Omnipotent Sire,
Will fit me.  If but seldom, mighty Sire!
I see, lest nature in her part should tire."
Did, from th' eternal Sovran, beam entire
As mine was at those words: and so entire
In crystal, glass, and amber, shines entire,
Of saintly flesh, must, being thus entire,
With purpose of my lady to inquire
The other, nearest, who adorns our quire,
Hugues of Saint Victor, Pietro Mangiadore,
And from heav'n's queen, whom fervent I adore,
Where flames the arduous Spirit of Isidore,
Of buskin or of sock hath fail'd before.
By the keen lance, both after and before
Whence I my vision, clearer shall before,
Their vizors off, look other than before,
Eternal Love unfolded.  Nor before,
Of Beatrice, resting, as before,
Clear'd of the rack, that hung on it before,
Ardour into my breast, unfelt before.
     "Much more than vainly doth he loose from shore,
T' instruct me of its state.  "'Twixt either shore
So I again resorted to the lore
On th' everlasting counsel, and explore,
Who did provide Augustin of his lore.
Of friar Thomas, and his goodly lore,
Yet in new doubt was I entangled more,
If we should wish to be exalted more,
For visual strength, refining more and more,
To thee, how for three hundred years and more
Unripen'd for conversion:  back once more
To vitiate thy beam: so that once more
But since the deed is ever priz'd the more,
Kindles our love, and in degree the more,
The more it warms thee, pleases me the more.
The greater blessedness preserves the more.
As thou hast noted, still doth kindle more,
In this their order, diversely, some more,
If body enter body, how much more
The world possess'd me.  Had the time been more,
Admonish'd, I the question urg'd no more;
Wherein believing, he endur'd no more
To follow, but not follow them no more;
Complete.  My tongue shall utter now, no more
So clean, the semblance did not alter more.
Mad'st thee a joyful burden: and yet more
Meet is, that to exalt its glory more,
Not for the world's sake, for which now they pore
The preacher now provides himself with store
For those whom grace hath better proof in store
Found all contentment.  Yet no smile she wore
Consenting with its course, when he of yore,
Thy ill-entreating!  and, O blest Navarre!
Of her first husband, slighted and obscure,
Nor with oracular response obscure,
Accordant walk: Whom God will not endure
Came through that medium down, unmix'd and pure,
Wherein thou art, impassible and pure,
And, when the Lombard tooth, with fangs impure,
That image stampt by the' everlasting pleasure,
But it is part of our delight, to measure
Into her consistory, and at leisure
Goodness celestial, whose broad signature
Compar'd unto the sounding of that lyre,
Leave I; for he may answer thee with ease,
Nor height impeded, but my view with ease
Been mere and unconditional release.
The prayers sent up to God for his release,
All apprehension, me it well would please,
The circuit widen'd, noting the increase
The vision needs increasing, much increase
Show yet more gracious.  Therefore shall increase,
When she is ta'en to heav'n."  By words like these
As strickly as thou may) save one of these,
     Sudden, as I perceiv'd them, deeming these
She had no cause at which to grieve: with these
I answer'd:  "Nature did not make for these
It is not therefore without cause, that these,
So saw I move that stately sign, with praise
Wherefore, if I was silent, fault nor praise
And with such figuring of Paradise
Doth the sweet symphony of Paradise
Such help, as favour wins in Paradise.
These eyes are not thy only Paradise."
Bears goodly blossoms; but its ruddy promise
Of Brenta and of Piava, there doth rise,
That he would look from whence the fog doth rise,
And to the primal love our ken shall rise;
To issue, and reflected upwards rise,
How I above those lighter bodies rise."
That force and will are blended in such wise
Both openly, and in secret, in such wise
Rise scatter'd, source of augury to th' unwise;
And for his justice, every method else
Of learning well retain'd, unfruitful else.
Ne'er fails to kindle love; and if aught else
Parhelion unto all things, and naught else
That each good, found without it, is naught else
No more to keep me wond'ring and suspense,
Once more of things, that held my thought suspense,
In their opinion, when the key of sense
It past all former wont.  And, as by sense
A little ruby, whereon so intense
     What place for entrance Beatrice chose,
Were nail'd upon the wood.  But lo!  of those
I fear my life may perish among those,
Are aim'd at by this bow; hut even those,
Though all partake their shining, yet in those
The more, the loftier their vision.  Those,
Urging its arduous matter to the close),
Thou to whom grace vouchsafes, or ere thy close
Of our blest Lady.  Near upon my close
Unto the race to come, that shall not lose
To justice and to truth, how might I choose
Ere for themselves they had the power to choose.
Thou mov'st to boasting, when I could not choose,
Of hunger, ere he one could freely choose.
While yet a stammerer, with his tongue let loose
And Importuni: well for its repose
     Though mainly prompt new question to propose,
Both who pretend its power and who oppose.
When to their view the Lateran arose
Full-blossom'd in my bosom, as a rose
Where it doth break its steepness most, arose
Her sway?  Into the yellow of the rose
Are in gradation throned on the rose.
Beneath the rays of Christ?  Here is the rose,
Which from the trinal band soft-breathing rose.
Thy thirst, which from the triple question rose.
Flew downward to the mighty flow'r, or rose
Extended to their utmost of this rose,
Are as it were two roots unto this rose.
Thus up the neck, as it were hollow, rose
Thy soaring, (if I rightly deem,) than lapse
If it were true, had through the sun's eclipse
The lily from the lance had hung reverse,
Obstructed aught.  For, through the universe,
Th' ungrateful nation, fickle and perverse.
Fattens with this his swine, and others worse
Thou in his audience shouldst thereof discourse."
O'erspent, regain its virtue, with discourse
Of unreplying matter, so this course
Like flame in alabaster, glow'd its course.
And know, that by intenser love its course
With instinct giv'n, that bears it in its course;
Which doth the earth engarland, shapes its course,
Cost him his son.  In her circuitous course,
Beyond whose chiding, after weary course,
But tell me, if thou hast it in thy purse."
Who led me unto God, admonish'd:  "Muse
Contemplating, I fail to pierce the cause."
Their circling.  Of that fatal lapse the cause
If rarity were of that dusk the cause,
Of vision, marvel not: but learn the cause
That in thy joy art shrouded!  say the cause,
There would in thee for wonder be more cause,
And his beneficence:  for he shall cause
To intellectual.  For no other cause
Keener than e'er was felt, to know their cause.
Not ceasing, but suspense, in silent pause,
Excuse me that, whereof in my excuse
Upon the earth.  The language I did use
His mother; but no sooner hath free use
Thy speech hath raised in me; for much I muse,
     Now rest thee, reader!  on thy bench, and muse
So mighty in renown, as every muse
Beside the Adriatic, in the house
The gilded hilt and pommel, in his house.
Held on them fix'd her looks: e'en as the spouse
Two champions to the succour of his spouse
The father and the master, with his spouse,
     "From Valdipado came to me my spouse,
Or more intelligential and abstruse,
And so beseemeth: for, in mortals, use
As earthly thought determines two obtuse
Are therefore wand'rers.  Yet before the date,
To whom these days shall be of ancient date."
Are by created virtue' inform'd: create
Dissolve.  Yet these were also things create,
     If I were only what thou didst create,
Are wafted through Perugia's eastern gate:
A dame to whom none openeth pleasure's gate
As now to thee, hath twice the heav'nly gate
The vapours, who with us had linger'd late
To thy perception, where I told thee late
Intent, re-ent'ring on the wheel she late
Unto the mountains that had bow'd them late
And if her nature well thou contemplate.
"Be to mine eyes the remedy or late
Wherein the word divine was made incarnate;
By using well thou think'st to consecrate,
Thyself, and all who hear, invigorate
That he had ris'n in silence, and was prostrate,
Who of all spirits hath review'd the state,
Our Sovran Lord--that settleth this estate
Rather it is inherent in this state
On which, the crown, already o'er its state
And to his enemies terrible.  So replete
The lustre of the seal should be complete:
This council, till the sun had made complete,
Contented.  But the blessed Agapete,
By either key, the yellow and the white.
To negro blackness change her virgin white.
"This fair assemblage!  stoles of snowy white
Is sacred to the lonely Eremite,
The sword of heav'n is not in haste to smite,
The Gospel, and that ye yourselves did write,
Who speaks of Christ, nor who doth read nor write,
From Valdigrieve past the Buondelmonte.
To him, that liv'd in solitude remote,
Divided thought and images remote
It wheel'd its bands, then tow'rd Dyrrachium smote,
To him, who heareth not distinct the note;
As one who knows the name of thing by rote,
Was ta'en to fashion that fair cheek, whose taste
He to the left, the parent, whose rash taste
In love and in delight so absolute,
And with complacency so absolute
For praying, in accordance thus were mute?
Issued a breath, that in attention mute
Canvas the' angelic nature, and dispute
To whom more guilt and shame are justly due.
     "Think now of one, who were a fit colleague,
Essence threefold and one, mysterious league
The lowest: in the midst, bound with strict league,
Be shorten'd with the time.  No mortal tongue
Of what thou then appearedst, give my tongue
Smites it, remains dismantled of the hue
(Where I had enter'd), not through change of hue,
For I therein, methought, in its own hue
Now wilt thou say, that there of murkier hue
The truth is as thou deem'st; for in this hue
When thus I heard: "Wonder not, if my hue
Doth ever watch it.  See, how thence oblique
To iron in the furnace, every cirque
Because, if what were told me, had been true
A thing incredible I tell, tho' true:
But that what I disclose to thee is true,
But at fair aim and glad.  Yet is it true,
Seek her: and, with affection, whilst I sue,
Must, both in heav'n and here beneath, ensue.
Trac'd by the generator, still pursue
Ordains its providence to be the virtue
O light impregnate with exceeding virtue!
Their substance, and create the' informing virtue
The fountain whence they flow'd.  O gracious virtue!
Are met with but in babes, each taking leave
     Then by the spirit, that doth never leave
"Supreme of gifts, which God creating gave
Was after the first counsel that Christ gave.
Was Peter, he that with the widow gave
To its appointed kingdom, nor would have
And goodness, virtue owe and grace.  Of slave,
To know the rest how sorely thou wouldst crave;
Of speech, than he doth wish her in her grave.
The oars, erewhile dash'd frequent in the wave,
And as the glow burns ruddiest o'er the wave,
Vanish'd, as heavy substance through deep wave.
     As through translucent and smooth glass, or wave
In three eternal Persons I believe,
But speak thou with them; listen, and believe,
And I reply: I in one God believe,
"Who seest that, which thou didst so believe,
Of the first human father dost believe,
Which haply vulgar hearts can scarce conceive.
By their well-fitted guerdon.  Of the five,
How feeble and how faint art thou, to give
Were but the fifth of them this day alive.
The death which he endur'd that I should live,
Of frail mortality, thenceforth to live
He may put forth his hand 'gainst such, as drive
(And pray they be not scant) that thou wouldst drive
Blindly to execute a rash resolve,
That hath his eyes most fix'd on God, shall solve
Another question thwarts thee, which to solve
At Europe's extreme point, the bird of Jove
So that it fell to fabled names of Jove,
The floor of heav'n, was crown'd. " Angelic Love
Bars not the door, no more than she above,
Smiles from within and radiance from above,
And, as the words were ending, from above,
Whose path not bending thus, in heav'n above
The country's custom.  We descry above,
Imperishable life of peace and love,
Their concord and glad looks, wonder and love,
That hath for confine only light and love,
Here thou to us, of charity and love,
Wont to believe the dotage of fond love
Looking upon the beauteous eyes, whence love
So bright, that in my thought: said: "The love,
For in thy womb rekindling shone the love
Looking into his first-born with the love,
The second light: and she, whose gentle love
Engirt by that it girdeth.  Wherefore love,
Descend these hallow'd steps: not that more love
One sole eternal Godhead, of whose love
Nor fully ripen'd in the flame of love,
"If beyond earthly wont, the flame of love
Light intellectual replete with love,
By the mere act of his eternal love.
Which is supreme in knowledge and in love
His dearest lady, and enjoin'd their love
Divin'd; and with such gladness, that God's love
How many are the fangs, with which this love
With gestures such as spake a father's love.
Despoils himself forever of that love.
Till other's tongue reveal them.  Fervent love
Learn I from him, who shows me the first love
And celebrate his glory, whom they love,
By supplication mov'd and holy love)
The living Justice, in whose breath I move,
And 'tween the summit and the base did move
Three mirrors shalt thou take, and two remove
In these bright stars, that round them circling move
Of the great Maccabee, another move
The pair of blessed luminaries move.
Such was my cheer, when Beatrice drove
What though, when tasted first, thy voice shall prove
Shot from the bow of exile.  Thou shalt prove
The circle thereto most conjoin'd observe;
Wouldst after all he hath beheld, preserve
Share equally) the more is to preserve.
Which were vouchsaf'd me, should for ensign serve
Thy thirst with drops of sweetness."  Yet blank awe,
A Salterello and Cianghella we
Transmitted. hierarchy of gods, for aye
The source of primal truth it dwells for aye:
As see not the First cause entire: and ye,
Through the just anger that hath murder'd ye
Wherefore of grace God op'd in him the eye
No purfled dames, no zone, that caught the eye
When on the edge of ruin clos'd thine eye.
From organ comes, so comes before mine eye
That figure me, those, glittering in mine eye,
As joy through pupil of the living eye.
Distinctly, are below from mortal eye
On th' everlasting light, wherein no eye
Who loves his work so inwardly, his eye
On her lov'd daughter, that with moveless eye
The stated rounds, that to th' observant eye
Hangs over it with never-sated gaze,
Bat painted on her cheek; and her fix'd gaze
That overhangs their couch, with wakeful gaze
Hides through excess of light, when his warm gaze
On the high triumph of thy realm to gaze!
If I may gain such favour, as to gaze
That other host, that soar aloft to gaze
And bent on Beatrice all its gaze.
That on the sovran pleasure he may gaze.
And for the peer Orlando, two my gaze
On firm-set poles revolving, trail'd a blaze
And veil'd in dense impenetrable blaze.
Then seem'd to me so much of heav'n to blaze
And every sparkle shivering to new blaze,
Wherewith I sparkle, equaling with my blaze
But marvel too?  'Twixt gladness and amaze,
Numberless lights, the which in kind and size
Within these rays his Maker."  Like the leaf,
All, as I name them, down from deaf to leaf,
But he, who search'd our volume, leaf by leaf,
If he in love, in hope, and in belief,
And Macra's, that divides with passage brief
He hath in sooth good cause for endless grief,
Another, with her maidens, drawing off
Which thou hadst seen, had that been shaken off.
As star by side of star.  And so far off,
Began; and thus, as one who breaks not off
Be granted, that first motion is; or if
In Him, who is truth's mirror, and Himself
Releas'd him merely, or else man himself
Are present.  Not for increase to himself
Into new natures, like unto himself,
     Like to the bachelor, who arms himself,
Mighty in learning, and did set himself
In Christ accomplish'd, innocence herself
Who would have all her court be like herself.
And as th' unblemish'd dame, who in herself
The fresh leaves, with which Europe sees herself
Choose which thou wilt, nor even Mary's self,
Was not for words to speak, nor memory's self
Another, how the light shrouded itself
Doth, through his bounty, congregate itself,
Immediate, and enamours of itself;
Hath dispossess my spirit of itself.
Proceeded, with voice, alter'd from itself
So that thy anxious thought is in itself
All envying in its bounty, in itself
And draws the spirit most unto itself,
Foul usury doth not more lift itself
If, free of hind'rance, thou hadst fix'd thyself
Suspended, holds thine eyes--or ere thyself
Sole in thyself that dwellst; and of thyself
Cities and realms by thee!  thou with thyself
Lo!  I have set before thee, for thyself
Sped to her rescue.  Judge then for thyself
"With false imagination thou thyself
Power to look up, and I beheld myself,
The heed, wherewith I do prepare myself
Most dear to me, I may not lose myself
Supported, lifts me so above myself,
Freely to speak my thought: above myself
Coveted sight, more fondly, for myself,
Th' exemplar and its copy: for myself,
     Whence she who saw me, clearly as myself,
That thou mayst see as clearly as myself.
Is plac'd, then loosen'd flies, I saw myself
"This stream, and these, forth issuing from its gulf,
Of Joshua on the holy land, whereof
In infinite excess.  In proof whereof,
Toward us mov'd a light, at view whereof
By its own virtue rear'd then stands aloof;
Which grows in transport as we mount aloof.
Faith of things hop'd is substance, and the proof
That grac'd my lady, gave me ample proof
By proof of right, and of the false reproof;
To other view excluded, hence of proof
He hath defin'd it, substance, and then proof."
That which we hold through faith, not shown by proof,
Together both, girding the' horizon hang,
E'en the warm Nile was conscious to the pang;
Of its own lion.  They, of whom I sprang,
"Ave, Maria, Gratia Plena," sang:
There halted, and "Regina Coeli " sang
Midmost for pupil, was the same, who sang
But flow'd to me the first from him, who sang
Accordant with the rest my lady sang.
To whom thou in the world erewhile didst Sing
Which through the' etherial concave comes rejoicing."
Whom at the right wheel thou beheldst advancing,
Th' effect of grace divine and merit preceding.
And that as far in blessedness exceeding,
E'en at the outset of thy heralding,
What they are, and how grievous their offending,
A body, in whose virtue dies the being
The being of the world, and mine own being,
Mak'st dull, so that thou seest not the thing,
A faithful witness.  Thou shall leave each thing
Better discern, than thou whatever thing
O'ercame, that never till that hour was thing
For wisdom, to the end he might be king
And of the fluent phrasemen make your king;
How well is lov'd in heav'n the righteous king,
With unrob'd jerkin; and their good dames handling
As if 't admire its brave appareling
O Buondelmonte!  what ill counseling
The lustre, that erewhile bespake me, smiling
Nor yet doth linger, save unto his seeming,
Which he betokens by his radiant seeming.
That did ingem the sixth light, ceas'd the chiming
As one, who till arriv'd, weets not his coming.
Unto the beautiful garden, blossoming
As one, who fearful of o'er-much presuming,
And he of Spain in his twelve volumes shining,
Motion to motion, song to song, conjoining,
Amongst them down, to his own person joining
Prepare to quaff our blood.  O good beginning
And had'st good cause; for had my sojourning
His goodly spirit should move forth, returning
A lamping, as of quick and vollied lightning,
Of mortal life, through much importuning
That also tell."  As those, who in a ring
Unto the other two, who in a ring
Exactly, as the finger to the ring.
Though conquer'd, by its mercy conquering.
To mortal men, of hope a living spring.
'Twixt banks, on either side, painted with spring,
The house, from whence your tears have had their spring,
From thee, the next, distilling from his spring,
Deprav'd) joy to the Delphic god must spring
Leaving the circuit of their joyous ring,
That hath his eye already keen for bart'ring!
He was not yet much distant from his rising,
To be surpass in fall, as in its rising.
As never eye created saw its rising,
Pastime of heav'n, the which those ardours sing,
E'en thus th' external answered.  When the footing,
Whose welcome is the morn and eve his parting,
For naught, that man inclines to, ere was lasting,
Thou hadst been longer drawing out and thrusting
From the oak's birth, unto the acorn's setting.
Their influences from above deriving,
On earth, now hail'd in heav'n; and on pois'd wing.
That glitterance, wafted on alternate wing,
A thing to marvel at, in splendour glowing,
Such was the song.  Who doth not prune his wing
How plac'd: but the flight was not for my wing;
His beauty and his eagerness bewraying.
The saintly circles in their tourneying
The shout of 'death,' re-echo'd loud and long.
She led me up in this ladder, steep and long;
Turn backward, and invert their steps; erelong
Into a waste so empty, that ere long
Measure the circle; and, though pondering long
Then follow'd:  "No unpleasant thirst, tho' long,
That lookst on this and doth endure so long."
The path, that had been yearned for so long,
     I suffer'd it not long, and yet so long
In earth: and shall be, with the rest, so long,
The thorn frown rudely all the winter long
That warbling in the air expatiates long,
And thy great grandsire.  Well befits, his long
The hands of holy promise, finds a throng
Than any other in this gladsome throng.
E'en to the loveliest of the glittering throng.
Present itself to the triumphal throng,
So worthy, and with me have mov'd this throng."
That on white forehead set a pearl as strong
No dispensation for commuted wrong,
Absolute will agrees not to the wrong,
In kindness, as loose appetite in wrong,
The nature in assumption doom'd: ne'er wrong
Ill shapes that man his course, who makes his wrong
I dwell, who recompenseth every wrong."
Throughout all Paradise, that with the song
Bids the chords vibrate, and therein the song
That voice which joins the inexpressive song,
And other great festivity, of song,
Of grace divine inwoven and high song
Thus benediction uttering with song
Of Beatrice interrupts our song.
"Ave Maria" singing, and with that song
Could store, shall now be matter of my song.
from the world, to follow her, when young
And of whose envying so much woe hath sprung,
The Ravignani sat, of whom is sprung
And let them wince who have their withers wrung.
Whose marvellous life deservedly were sung
Is swifter than the Chiana.  There was sung
Thousands of angels; in resplendence each
As there are splendours, that it shines on: each
Produc'd coeval.  Yet in order each
As apprehending, hasteneth on to reach
Both innocent and guilty, did but reach
Then heard I:  "Wherefore holdest thou that each,
And radiance, light with light accordant, each
Was to their gratulation, silent, each,
And diving back, a living topaz each,
To certify himself of that reproach,
Lit sudden ore he deem of its approach,
Seem'd fire, breath'd equally from both.  Oh speech
And leaves a blank: for that our mortal speech,
To her, by whom my silence and my speech
Upon the glorious vision, from the which
When they shall see that volume, in the which
"Say, whence the costly jewel, on the which
Unto the holy triumph, for the which
     Had I a tongue in eloquence as rich,
And when that Worthy thus, from branch to branch,
Than to have them within, and bear the stench
"Speak, speak unto thy lady, that she quench
That covert, which hath hidden from thy search
For our redemption chose, eludes my search.
In the circumference, for the over arch,
That giveth me the captain of the church
Attributes, nor so means: and holy church
Did gore the bosom of the holy church,
That ancient father of the holy church,
Thither the Patriarch Jacob saw it stretch
Though that beheld most distant do not stretch
Seem'd reascending, and a higher pitch
If thou to me of shine impart so much,
Their wax, and that which molds it, differ much:
Had but my brother's foresight kenn'd as much,
Their childish looks and voice declare as much.
As 't were the shadow; for things there as much
O'er our suburban turret rose; as much
Invites me; for lo!  there aloft, as much
The mind remounts not without aid.  Thus much
By him, that runs her annual game.  Thus much
There all perfection is vouchsafed; and such
From forth the fountain of all truth; and such
That 'well they thrive;' and that 'no second such
Is aftergrowth.  And of the seeing such
Predestination!  is thy root from such
Would ask the  guard of braver arms, than such
E'en such was I; nor unobserv'd was such
And from his heirs to issue.  And that such
When gold had fail'd them.  Here in synod high
The thunder doth not lift his voice so high,
For that thy views not yet aspire so high."
And in each gesture grace and honour high.
Freely the sage, though wrapt in musings high,
     Whence, after utt'rance of a piteous sigh,
Beatrice, I descried her not, although
When they saw Jason following the plough.
And this place hath authority enough
That is in heav'n most lustrous, nor the seraph
Of monarchs, sprung through me from Charles and Rodolph;
'Tis darkness all, or shadow of the flesh,
A little while returning to the flesh,
Or on more vile allowance.  Mortal flesh
Humbled himself to put on mortal flesh.
Or art or nature in the human flesh,
And wouldst, that I should bolt my words afresh
     As in a quiet and clear lake the fish,
It may with many woefully disrelish;
Thy will distinctly, utter forth the wish,
Affection found no room for other wish.
Liveliest and loftiest.  She my secret wish
I will content thee even to thy wish
     Thus she her words, not heedless of my wish,
That it might yield contentment to my wish;
When for their stubbornness at Padua's marsh
Of holy love, that at the second death
By true repenting slack'd the pace of death:
Rebuk'd the ling'ring tardiness of death.
Took from the adder black and sudden death.
Wills of his grace that thou, or ere thy death,
Yet still continued holy), and beneath,
Art, as the noon-day torch: and art, beneath,
When I before had cast my view beneath,
His progress in the zodiac underneath.
Suspected peril at a whistle's breath,
To grace his triumph gathers thence a wreath
In circuit journey round the blessed wreath.
At my baptismal font, shall claim the wreath
To his own hand remorseless, to the path,
Nature, in generation, must the path
His family, that wont to trace his path,
To execute the vengeance of its wrath.
Thus by the virtue, not the seeming, breadth
Look then how lofty and how huge in breadth
The skill is look'd into, that fashioneth
     "Those, in the eye who live the first and fifth,
Of Christ, and all the harvest reap'd at length
     O prime enlightener!  thou who crav'st me strength
Upon my praises following, of the eighth
Gentiles but Christians, in firm rooted faith,
With lighter probe or deep, touching the faith,
To aid them in their warfare for the faith.
The sacred stairs are sever'd, as the faith
In liveliest portraiture.  But since true faith
But unbaptiz'd he dies, and void of faith.
Christ's nature merely human, with such faith
Take then no vow at random: ta'en, with faith
The loving million of the Christian faith,
More was not wanting, than the parents' faith,
So that thy knowledge waits not on thy faith:
And, all that he hath heard revolving, saith
For souls belov'd of God. Isaias saith,
Is truth, that of himself to Moses saith,
The glories of our court, thou mayst therewith
Was liberty of will, the boon wherewith
That murmuring of the eagle, and forthwith
Yet not in this our modern phrase, forthwith
And of my bliss in Paradise.  Forthwith
Reading in the straw-litter'd street."  Forthwith,
Of mine eyelids did drink of it, forthwith
Nor the first vacant fortune, nor the tenth),
lied scarce been held entire. Beyond the sev'nth,
"Hosanna Sanctus Deus Sabaoth
Did compass in the other's beam; and both
Suffic'd me; henceforth there is need of both
I but of one will tell:  he tells of both,
With kindly greeting hail'd, extolling both
That will not, still survives unquench'd, and doth
Beside me sparkles, as the sun-beam doth
Here break we off, as the good workman doth,
Eternally, as now: and, if it doth,
Felices ignes horum malahoth!"
That shapes the cloak according to the cloth:
In such plain open phrase, as may be smooth
On beauty, such, as I believe in sooth,
As sight can bear thee.  Yet, alas!  in sooth
But unto such, as turn and show the tooth,
In thought) that he should fathom to its depth
While sight was unconsum'd, and, in that depth,
I was a virgin sister in the earth;
Declar'd to me our justice on the earth
Below, like fire unmoving on the earth."
The first fruit of Christ's vicars on the earth,
The mind, that here is radiant, on the earth
When his good influence 'gan to bless the earth.
Nor marvel, that a denizen of earth
O beg ye grace for those, that are on earth
Much virtue would be lost, and here on earth,
In heav'n excelling, as once here on earth
The which no wish exceeds: and there on earth
If he liv'd not in fellowship on earth?"
In fervency; for wisdom upon earth,
And gaze thy fill.  But since thou hast on earth
Upon this body, which below on earth
From its original impulse warp'd, to earth,
Than shall our fleshly robe, which yonder earth
By whose pure laws upon your nether earth
Stood, eminent, whatever from our earth
Thy wishes, all that in this sphere have birth,
Span the thin cloud, the outer taking birth
In so sweet household, Mary at my birth
He was made sharer in our gamesome mirth.
Tread the light measure, in their fitful mirth
That were his foes, have little cause for mirth.
No sorrowful repentance here, but mirth,
Firmly upon me, manifested forth
     Next from the squadron, whence had issued forth
     As when, if Juno bid her handmaid forth,
To over-canopy the M. mov'd forth,
Simple and mix'd, both form and substance, forth
Feed now: the matter I indite, henceforth
My words thy mind have treasur'd, thou henceforth
Over the cruelty, which bars me forth
From the fair nest of Leda rapt me forth,
Is yet again unfolded, putting forth
Motion to all, counted unto them forth,
But through itself alone was driven forth
Fearless, and frank and jocund, utter forth
With such effulgence blazeth, as sends forth
Since he returns not such as he set forth,
And clearer far, thy brother hath set forth
Of good, which may not be increas'd, but forth
Bound up and stifled, nor breathes freely forth.
Of the great Baron (he whose name and worth
And make me such a vessel of thy worth,
With clear reply the shadows back, and truth
With sapience so profound, if truth be truth,
Therefore, 't is well thou take from me the truth,
Unto the thousandth parcel of the truth,
Are but a preface, shadowy of the truth
     "So that men, thus at variance with the truth
The soul of each one, loving, who the truth
Perchance he doth not wholly miss the truth.
Dispensing, seems to contradict the truth
Unto the party injur'd:  but the truth
With flame most pure, that to the sparkle' of truth
Spring, like a shoot, around the stock of truth;
Discerns, on which this proof is built.  Such truth
Thy deeming and my saying meet in truth,
Thy childish judgment; since not yet on truth
And, if I am a timid friend to truth,
     "The works, that follow'd, evidence their truth; "
Persuades me to this faith; but from that truth
I do accuse me, and may own my truth;
(As the sun changes quarter), to the sixth.
Giouchi, Sifanti, Galli and Barucci,
The Alberichi, Greci and Ormanni,
The Ughi, Catilini and Filippi,
With him of Arca saw, and Soldanieri
And the world's leaders, in the blessed beak
Voice there assum'd, and thence along the beak
Beyond her proper self; and, till I speak,
Let thine eye, waiting on the words I speak,
As mountain rock, the whilst he hears me speak),
Thus needs, that ye may apprehend, we speak:
From Ganges doth:  therefore let none, who speak
Genius, art, practice--I might not so speak,
The writing must be letters maim'd, that speak
There, where thou markest that which thou dost speak,
After with Titus it was sent to wreak
And therefore let the example serve, though weak,
Were in one praise concluded, 't were too weak
Who, like to scymitars, reflected back
Whence they were drawn, their steps had hasten'd back,
The white grown murky.  Jordan was turn'd back;
Of him, that on his Maker turn'd the back,
From the redundant petals, streaming back
That God should by his own ways lead him back
From centre to the circle, and so back
By being thence refracted farther back.
The shining of a flambeau at his back,
Then turn'd toward them, cause behind thy back
Of jests and gibes; and, so there be no lack
So courteously unto thee.  But the track,
Eager to listen, on the advent'rous track
Had settled in his place, the head and neck
Ye other few, who have outstretch'd the neck.
Before her day be ripe.  But ye are sick,
But hunger of new viands tempts his flock,
As surely as your church is vacant, flock
And reap'd Ausonian lands.  On the hard rock,
Can miss of, in itself apparent, struck
     As when the sturdy north blows from his cheek
In a brief moment on some maiden's cheek,
l mark; but, who thou art, am still to seek;
And thus did these, whom they had power to seek
"It were enough; nor should I further seek,
     "But (for we far have wander'd) let us seek
By the which thou didst on the billows walk.
Rush, with such eager straining, to the milk,
Home to the sheep-fold, destitute of milk.
That, fickle wanton, leaves its mother's milk,
Those tongues to sound, that have on sweetest milk
Had put forth more than blossoms.  The left bank,
And thus to me Beatrice:  "Thank, oh thank,
Witness'd augmented joy.  Here, reader!  think,
But first behooves thee of this water drink,
Sprinkle him.  Of the fount ye alway drink,
Of the Calfucci still the branchy trunk
Which took me reading in the sacred book,
In many a passage of their sacred book
Which never may be cancel'd from the book,
     "E'en as his beam illumes me, so I look
She tow'rds me bent her eyes, with such a look,
Bituminous upsteam'd), THAT too did look
To furnish out this turn.  Mine eyes did look
Where Anna sits, so well content to look
Since thy fair guide and lovely, in her look
Both less and greater in that mirror look,
All, as they circle in their orders, look
Unto himself in thought:  "And didst thou look
So dear and beautiful, they cannot brook
Did gird on me; in such good part he took
So great, in reference to him, who took
So cumb'rous it may speedily sink the bark,
On his already over-laden bark.
Have from the sea of ill love sav'd my bark,
The world was in its day of peril dark
Within its tabernacle, and left dark
Reach not its utmost depth."  Like to the lark,
Than five.  Mark Luni, Urbisaglia mark,
May fathom this decree.  It is a mark,
Howe'er, if love itself dispose, and mark
But only my transgressing of the mark
Ages long past or new, on one sole mark
On the baptiz'd: nor I, for sigil-mark
And were the world below content to mark
As eye doth in the sea; which though it mark
     "Florence, within her ancient limit-mark,
To some addition; that thou well, mayst mark
Into the eternal light, and clearly mark
Imprints: and from this germ, this firstling spark,
Is with such thirst inspir'd.  From a small spark
There shall be read the woe, that he doth work
Their circles in the horologe, so work
Resembling thus the artist in her work,
When the rejected tares in vain shall ask
Yet envious tongues incited him to ask
Like to the scholar, practis'd in his task,
The others kept their station: and this task,
Were to the church reclaim'd, to my great task,
Bare me into the ray authentical
When Mary stay'd beneath.  But not to deal
The cowls to sacks choak'd up with musty meal.
Its image takes an impress as a seal:
Set forth, and from him first receiv'd the seal
E'en in the haven's mouth seeing one steal,
To my rapt sight the arctic beams reveal.
Are centered; in this palace is the weal,
That bare the lively pressure of my zeal,
The which this priest, in show of party-zeal,
Have bastardized.  And they, of Portugal
Through greedy eyes to take the soul withal,
Around, and shroud me, as an animal
Song, that as much our muses doth excel,
Of that prime love, whose influence I feel,
But yet the will roll'd onward, like a wheel
I am, who thus with hov'ring flight enwheel
Vouchsaf'd me entrance to the lofty wheel
He came, who was the Holy Spirit's vessel,
Enjoy it.  At this point o'erpower'd I fail,
Fail not, or who, first faulty made them fail.
Largely bestow'd, if any of them fail,
And lively hope with violence assail
Faded my brow, be destin'd to prevail
Aloft, and downward with such sway prevail,
And love of singularity prevail.
Yet not for that the bosom's inward veil
That Constance held affection to the veil;
And rode triumphant through the civil broil.
Invites me with the other to like toil.
In the fond quest unconscious of her toil:
He hasted (not to intermit his toil),
Both heav'n and earth copartners in its toil,
So shall delight make thee not feel thy toil.
Which from so deep a fountain doth distil,
Good heed, if that, which I have told, recall
In chief escort her: one seraphic all
A law immutable hath establish'd all;
Are thrones; in whom the first trine ends.  And all
One near us drew, and sole began:  "We all
I wound my way, appear'd before me all,
The spirits of men contemplative, were all
Wherein the past is written.  Now were all
Not unobservant, beaming in ye all,
To be in charity must needs befall,
The murmuring of a river, that doth fall
Who meekly clings to it.  The aim of all
As from a cloud the fire is seen to fall,
From him transmitted, who is first of all,
For one of these may rise, the other fall."
The other cause: and if the other fall,
Part of the angels fell: and in their fall
Of that will treat which hath the more of gall.
Which falls 'twixt other men, the granting shall
Who in the sight of Him, that seeth all,
Surpassing, as in height, above them all,
And one the voice, that issued from them all.
Dealt by th' eternal hand, that tends them all."
And thus reflected come to thee from all.
One single virtue then would be in all,
Makes the Creator visible to all
That Alpha and Omega, is to all
The supreme virtue show'r not over all.
I may not say, so uniform was all,
Are plac'd throughout this kingdom, pleases all,
That Providence, who so well orders all,
That memory cannot follow.  Nathless all,
Few now are wanting here!  In that proud stall,
To human nature is allow'd, must all
Nor more or fewer years exist; but all
They call it Catria: at whose foot a cell
His pennons shook again; lightning thence fell
At thy last peace, the victim, Florence!  fell.
For light celestial, and abortive fell.
Lo!  from within the sky a cresset fell,
Of martyrdom, and for two years of hell,
Who, for my safety, hast not scorn'd, in hell
Its pathway, which the wisest fail to spell;
Of this our orb, what of myself I tell
     "Hear now and wonder at what next I tell.
In breathless awe, and hopes some time to tell
It is to pass in silence than to tell.
Not for more knowledge, but that he may tell
Affection sound, and human passions quell.
To wan and wither'd, if not tended well:
Had pointed his demand; yea noted well
How numberless!  The city, where we dwell,
Himself, in his own work enclos'd to dwell!
More to behold, and more in love to dwell?"
Created in his joyous sight to dwell,
And thence transmitting downwards.  Mark me well,
In its own silk enswath'd.  Thou lov'dst me well,
Detain'd me; and these words it spake:  "'T were well,
In falsehood thy belief o'erwhelm'd, if well
And, if thou mark and listen to them well,
I had not turn'd me to them; he may well
Of Ratza, who hath counterfeited ill
Forecasts, this garden equally to fill.
Spare not; and of our radiance take thy fill."
But to no lofty eminence, a hill,
Bestirring them to dry their feathers chill,
Scipio and Pompey triumph'd; and that hill,
Who fishes for the truth and wanteth skill.
Of heav'nly songsters prov'd his tuneful skill.
To stand against such outrage on her skill.
When it doth touch the limit of his skill.
Whose faultering hand is faithless to his skill.
I had not ended, when, like rapid mill,
Had rais'd for utterance, straight the holy mill
Because 't is willing to be conquer'd, still,
And whence thou hadst it?"  Thus proceeding still,
On its own unity revolving still.
And Modena's was mourn'd.  Hence weepeth still
Of Montemurlo still: the Cerchi still
Wond'ring I gaz'd; and admiration still
By Adice and Tagliamento, still
Hath satiated, and of another still
So rested, and the mingling sound was still,
And as the arrow, ere the cord is still,
I was constrain'd to wear the hat that still
Out of its proper climate, thrives but ill.
The hallow'd place again.  In them, had will
These spirits stood exculpate.  For the will,
And am Justinian; destin'd by the will
Should they not hearken, who, to give me will
From non-compliance, it agrees.  Of will
Then must our wishes jar with the high will
With love's first flame to glow:  "Brother!  our will
And put power into them to bend his will.
E'en as our King, who in us plants his will;
More than to death, was, 'gainst his father's will,
To whom I turn'd, flashing, bewray'd its will
Be ye not heedless of his urgent will;
Return.  These are the questions which thy will
Well squar'd to fortune's blows.  Therefore my will
Of more affection for thee, 't is my will
Moves the third heaven!' and in one orb we roll,
Brancheth the circle, where the planets roll
While the everlasting pleasure, that did full
That save its Maker, none can to the full
In terms more full,
Princedoms in heaven; yet are of love so full,
And as our Lady on her glorious stool,
Within itself the ever-during pearl
I wist not of the fisherman nor Paul."
Have told him true, and sees the record faithful
Began:  "The love, that makes me beautiful,
From her fair countenance my gladden'd soul
My ken, and Robert Guiscard.  And the soul,
As from self-question to assure the soul."
Is meritorious, even as the soul
The keenness of my sight.  But not the soul,
Mayst at the wedding sup,--shall rest the soul
     And Beatrice:  "The first diving soul,
"The grace, that holds sweet dalliance with thy soul,
And thou shalt bear this written in thy soul
That with great craving long hath held my soul,
So she who doth imparadise my soul,
Thus in that heav'nly banqueting my soul
Still shed new heat and vigour through my soul!
My passage at your clime.  To you my soul
That wish can dare no further--every soul,
Of laughter, while he vents them, his big cowl
     Ye host of heaven!  whose glory I survey l
And therefore dost not ask me who I am,
Contented; vanquishing me with a beam
And that which can die, are but each the beam
That all in counterpoise must kick the beam.
Thy look on me reverteth, was the beam
To girdle in the sun.  All is one beam,
Some ill-mark'd vestige of that primal beam.
Their love and vision fix'd.  O trinal beam
The Sybil's sentence.  O eternal beam!
     O gentle glitter of eternal beam!
True love must needs ascend with slacker beam.
Arriveth, must be ripen'd in our beam."
Erewhile irradiate only with his beam,
Thus heard I one, who spake:  "Since with its beam
Whose very cause depends upon its beam."
With light so lively, that the tremulous beam
     I was as one, when a forgotten dream
Impression of the feeling in his dream;
Dwelt I upon the shore, 'twixt Ebro's stream
Of love celestial in such copious stream,
Enlighten'd, beyond which no truth may roam,
Fearless of bruising from the nightly ram,
Circling in fashion of a diadem,
"Thou in thy thought art pond'ring (as I deem,
Who in the erring world beneath would deem,
Gladdening the thronged spirits.  Each did seem
Chiusi and Sinigaglia; and 't will seem
Of splendour, shall to view less radiant seem,
The number of the chosen: and esteem
Which now the dotards hold in such esteem,
From mid the cluster shone there; yet no gem
Those who on either hand may prop and lead them,
Did look for, on whose tables I inscrib'd them.
The iron hot, or on her anvil mould them."
The tresses from the distaff, lectur'd them
To Cupid and Dione, deem'd of them
When death's chill seized her; and that one of them
The earth and water, and all things of them
Beheld her charms, up to that view of them,
The region of the angels deck'd with them.
Who sought God's friendship in the cord: with them
From him, nor from his love triune with them,
As Jesus stood before thee, well can'st speak them."
Upholds their nature merely, but in them
That honour and renown might wait on them:
Afflation of eternal bliss pervades them.
Incredible to those who witness them;
     The sweet dame beckon'd me to follow them:
But is as level with the destin'd aim,
The yellow lilies, and with partial aim
To those who in respect of kindred claim,
Whom better it had suited to exclaim,
Expect completion of thy lofty aim,
And great as ancient, of Sannella him,
For in the compact between God and him,
The spousals were complete 'twixt faith and him,
So suddenly doth the fair child of him,
Who thither carried first the name of Him,
Hath the church militant: so 't is of him
Adoring; for the charity of him,
And Norway, there shall be expos'd with him
Openly or in secret, shall with him
Must spread them:  and the more remote from him
Beheld the wondrous fruit, that was from him
Their orders, marshal'd in his thought.  From him
Sparkles of virtue shall shoot forth in him,
To the chief good; for that its light in him
As this doth clasp the others; and to Him,
Its topmost round, when it appear'd to him
By doing worse or, not unlike to him
How dear thou holdst the virtue, these to him
Safe in herself and constant unto him,
Such as I best can frame, give thanks to Him,
Be idle in its praise.  Look thou to him
Conducted by the lofty seraphim.
The world's deceitfulness, to all who hear him,
On other thoughts: bethink thee, that near Him
Had shown the web, which I had streteh'd for him
Of Aguglione's hind, and Signa's, him,
Their fame, which I with duteous zeal embalm.
That in my thoughts I of that sacred realm
When Prague shall mourn her desolated realm.
The limits of his German shores.  The realm,
Which blew the second over Suabia's realm,
Seated in state, the queen, that of this realm
Thy subtle thoughts have bound thee.  From this realm
"None ever hath ascended to this realm,
And note thou of this just and pious realm
And so beseems:  for that he bare the palm
The mighty contest won with either palm;
Down in Cieldauro, and from martyrdom
And from the wilds was dragg'd to martyrdom,
Reflected semblances to see of whom
Prefacing, next it added;  "he, of whom
Therefore I pray the Sovran Mind, from whom
In deep discernment.  Lastly this, from whom
O most exceeding grace divine!  to whom,
Virtues, and powers the third.  The next to whom
Prompts me to tell of th' other guide, for whom
Lords it, and bears his head aloft, for whom
Such nature on him, and endur'd the doom.
That all your world craves tidings of its doom:
Expected long, shall crown at last the bloom!"
As for the leaves, that in the garden bloom,
Thou fain wouldst hear, what plants are these, that bloom
The beautiful Trinacria lies in gloom
As is the colouring in fancy's loom,
Thou didst exalt thy glory to give room
Were understood, the sophist would want room
That on the sov'ran essence, which it wells from,
For their excuse, they do not see their harm?
There are of them, in truth, who fear their harm,
Whose haven erst was with its own blood warm.
Enlighteneth all our tribe: and ere his term
Imagine (and retain the image firm,
That of that happy realm the shadow'd form
That as ofttimes but ill accords the form
As was my ken from hers; and yet the form
The novel wonder, and trace out the form,
     So rov'd my ken, and its general form
Dismantled in thy mind, I will inform
And if thy mind observe me well, this form,
That, long as till thy vision, on my form
He first through pride supplanted, who was sum
Upon the bosom of our pelican:
Yet it may chance, erelong, the Vatican,
     "The deep things," I replied, "which here I scan
Finds not; e'en such was I, intent to scan
This consistory round about mayst scan,
No more shall hunger, thirst, or sorrow can.
Near as they can, approaching; and they can
Whither the line is drawn.  All natures lean,
But since hath disaccustom'd I began;
T' indulge the fervent wish; and I began:
That to my will gave wings; and I began
Upon the warp, was woven, I began,
     "O saintly sire and spirit!"  I began,
Assum'd the teacher's part, and mild began:
Most earnest, I addressed me, and began,
To talk yet further with me, and began:
When thus her words resuming she began:
Their unaccomplishable work began.
     She ceas'd from further talk, and then began
And thus the saintly orison began.
From marking them, or ere her words began,
Beaming upon me, thus her words began:
     He forthwith answ'ring, thus his words began:
The shuttle to its point.  She thus began:
Where it before was singing, thus began,
Seem'd from her visage shining, thus began:
by inward meditations, thus began:
Open'd her lips, and gracious thus began:
So there new substances, methought began
Of inexpressive joy.  "He," it began,
The delicate living there of the Bohemian,
Such frequent question; for thou saidst--'A man
Is dark to me.  I fain would know, if man
Which whelm and sink thee down!  The will in man
These tokens of pre-eminence on man
Who brought the soul-subliming truth to man.
     He straight rejoin'd:  "Say, were it worse for man,
Thee slow in motion, as a weary man,
With the short-sighted vision of a span?
Down to its foot, one luminary ran
Nathan the prophet, Metropolitan
A constellation off and more, had ta'en
His title from the fam'd Bellincione ta'en.
     "Now, if my words be clear, if thou have ta'en
Th' affection mark'd, when that its sway hath ta'en
May pardon, if it tremble with the burden.
There all things are as they have ever been:
The rite accepted.  With such mighty sheen
Within the bosom of that mighty sheen,
Unlocks not, surely wonder's weapon keen
     As when the lightning, in a sudden spleen
He tells it to you not in words, nor e'en
God and our nature join'd!  There will be seen
Or ere the crop be ripe.  For I have seen
Mine eyes a flower-besprinkled mead have seen,
And, in the saintly eyes what love was seen,
The column, cloth'd with verrey, still was seen
And such eclipse in heav'n methinks was seen,
Appointed, such as in these wheels is seen.
Immortally above, he hath not seen
     "Ope thou thine eyes, and mark me: thou hast seen
Was the curst pride of him, whom thou hast seen
Describ'd on Jerome's pages thou hast seen.
This also I entreat of thee, O queen!
So far pursued, as till the space between
Wherefore such disagreement is between
And was this semblance thine?"  So gaz'd I then
Receives, and rests unbroken.  If I then
Current opinion leads to false: and then
Upon its centre whirl'd the light; and then
And hence thy surname grew.  I follow'd then
And violent; so look'd Beatrice then.
As none may see and fail to' enjoy.  Raise, then,
I could not look upon them.  Smiling then,
Goes round thee with his shears.  Resuming then
In greatness more than earthly; I, who then
That hath Saint John for guardian, what was then
She had no armlets and no head-tires then,
His blame, if he believeth not?'--What then,
Rejoicing, dominations first, next then
Thou compensate the brief delay.  Say then,
In fashion, as a snow-white rose, lay then
Was by the eternal Spirit inwreath'd:  and when
Ere the crude aliment, which thou hast taken,
In depth of counsel by created ken
Beatrice stood unmov'd; and I with ken
This sphere assign'd, that oft from mortal ken
Th' eternal judgment unto mortal ken."
Removeth from the east her eager ken;
Gazing, as never eagle fix'd his ken.
For virtue, yet more high to lift his ken
Said Beatrice, "that behooves thy ken
Boldness to fix so earnestly my ken
     So ready and so cordial an "Amen,"
And worse: and, at your birth, ye, mortal men,
O fond anxiety of mortal men!
In her third epicycle, shed on men
Not seldom, brother, it hath chanc'd for men
Of Pietro Bernardone, and by men
Which will give speedy motion to the pen,
And, marking clearly, that I told thee, 'Risen,'
As by the fifth or half ye count forth ten.
With her own light makes ever calm the heaven,
Shall quiver where it falls.  Within the heaven,
Of all that it contains.  The following heaven,
The light communicated, which through heaven
The Lady higher up enshrine in heaven,
Was manifested, as a star in heaven.
     "This jewel, that is next me in our heaven,
By blessed movers be inspir'd.  This heaven,
Vocal and consonant, were five-fold seven.
Of that lov'd monarch, in whose happy reign
Fix'd on the suitor, witness'd, how benign
 Rob'd, as the rest, in glory.  Joy benign
Was link'd in such conjointment, 't was a sign
The eye was kindled: and the blessed sign
Those rays describ'd the venerable sign,
That, which was late behind thee.  But, in sign
Were such a crystal in the Cancer's sign.
Moses and Samuel, and either John,
Who vers'd in geometric lore, would fain
Shall roar so loud, that fortune shall be fain
With fourfold lustre to its orb again,
Then, as if drunk with odors, plung'd again
Was to the sun, that fills it, turn'd again,
Mine eyes on Beatrice once again.
Her bidding, and encounter once again
Took up the strain; and thus it spake again:
Witness of things, which to relate again
Have I learnt that, which if I tell again,
The lessons love can read me."  Yet again
Who through thy mortal weight shall yet again
None e'er descend, and mount them not again,
To shape it in his fantasy again,
Others with better voice may pray, and gain
Thus he began:  "thou shalt not knowledge gain
But in itself intelligibly plain,
Such, as or ere the Lamb of God was slain,
The bottom from the shore, in the wide main
Of his omniscience should not still remain
Thou arguest; if the good intent remain;
Where losing me, perchance ye may remain
That tongue nor pen may follow it.  Tow'rds Spain
He for ill pleasure pay with equal pain.
Nor e'en the inward shaping of the brain,
     Unwillingly from question I refrain,
With other voice and fleece of other grain
Is, by the dripping of perpetual rain,
My spirit reel'd, so passing sweet the strain:
The record sound in this unequal strain.
But ye perversely to religion strain
Discourse, continued in her saintly strain.
Their radiance as from ours the starry train:
That to God's paupers rightly appertain,
Kindled afresh, with vigour to sustain
Twofold, that circled me, he shall attain
"If thus, whate'er by learning men attain,
Nor deem of any change, as less than vain,
A ladder, which my ken pursued in vain,
Doth come across him, and he strives in vain
To rise in view; and round the other twain
     "But forasmuch as holy church, herein
How to the circle fitted, and therein
And gladly will I loose the knot, wherein
Like torrent bursting from a lofty vein;
One motion strikes on th' other.  There begin
With merer gladness, heard I thus begin:
Thou mayst be certain, take good lading in.
Suspended so they stood: and, from within,
As candle in his socket.  Then within
His outside seeming to the cheer within:
Of blessedness, to keep ourselves within
Of love: then added:  "Current is the coin
He sent, who by their deeds and words might join
Vengeance for vengeance of the ancient sin,
Fade, and the spangled firmament shuts in,
What promise thou from hope in chief dost win."
For, in her splendour only, shalt thou win
To render to these heavens: now 't is fall'n
Christians like these the Ethiop shall condemn:
Possess'd me.  Yet I mark'd it was a hymn
Then  "Glory to the Father, to the Son,
"O virgin mother, daughter of thy Son,
Flash'd up effulgence, as they glided on
I had been lost; but, so embolden'd, on
Thus they to different havens are mov'd on
To meet the hard emprize that draws me on.
Time for us with his beam, went circling on
Of louder trump than mine, which hasteneth on,
Records it not; and the pen passeth on
     For Beatrice, she who passeth on
Of the fifth word they held their station,
Differing in love and sweet affection.
And, when desires thus err in their intention,
Over my nature, that no natural motion,
Doth more and better execution,
That was beguiled of Demophoon;
Pass by so suddenly.  And as the moon
One tells, how at Christ's suffering the wan moon
Gluts every food alike in every moon.
Which calls her still to matin prayers and noon,
Compounded, to corruption turn, and soon
From this perplexity will free thee soon
In that perfection of the sight, which soon
Ere one had reckon'd twenty, e'en so soon
And exile came it here.  Lo!  further on,
Seems blunt and forceless in comparison."
Sparkles a mother's fondness on her son)
And she was like the mother, who her son
But, as a mother, gracious to her son;
"My father!  well I mark how time spurs on
Weigh down his eyelids, for that he was son
The unwise passage of Laertes' son,
Will not delay its succour: and thou, son,
Not that I tasted of the tree, my son,
Hath circuited the mountain, was my son
Then added:  "So interpret thou, my son,
That waits the sloping beam, which Phaeton
Were in the Babylonian exile won,
Whisper'd the peace and ardour, which they won
And thou might'st after of Piccarda learn
Since from things sensible alone ye learn
In word and motion, bent from her to learn
Nor of their several distances not learn.
Thou kingly prudence and that ken mayst learn,
Yours without veil reflects it.  Ye discern
Th' eternal Providence, I well discern:
The good it apprehends.  I well discern,
In mortals, for the cause ye well discern,
Of social warfare; hence Torquatus stern,
Of other's worth.  Four daughters were there born
Must differ.  Therefore one is Solon born;
Subjected and supreme.  And there was born
In thee, that its great Maker did not scorn,
And it is soon extinct; thus from the horn,
The glitterance of Christ.  From horn to horn,
In me its lord expected, and that horn
What time the she-goat with her skiey horn
A sister, with like violence were torn
That, while she spake her image all did burn,
Direct his footsteps to so dread a bourn.
Her virgin beauty, and hath since made mourn
With complex potency attract and turn.
In his broad pathway, saw I him return,
     So, reader, as my hope is to return
The sheep, meanwhile, poor witless ones, return
E'en as a pilgrim bent on his return,
Unwelcome, on digestion it will turn
That one, who looks upon that light, can turn
Digested fitly to nutrition turn.
Enamour thee, as that thou dost not turn
Thy motion and thy virtue are begun,
E'en what his words declare: or else to shun
     As when, for ease of labour, or to shun
Wistfully on that region, where the sun
Now obvious and now averse, the sun.
What marvel, since no eye above the sun
Than erst, it wax'd:  and, as himself the sun
And straightway as the handmaid of the sun
For that they are so equal in the sun,
Like to a golden mirror in the sun;
I saw Beatrice turn'd, and on the sun
Bent back her steps, and shadow'd o'er the sun
Some mounting, and some less; e'en as the sun,
Malignant fell."  Such colour, as the sun,
     "The part in me, that sees, and bears the sun,,
Of this dim spot had seen, but that the sun,
Between discordant shores, against the sun
Like choicest ruby stricken by the sun,
Of praises to the never-wint'ring sun,
Have been her brightness!  What she was i' th' sun
The visage, Hyperion!  of thy sun;
Molded with nice exactness, and the heav'n
Of my ascent, together with the heav'n
Long in expectance, when I saw the heav'n
Which so persuade thee, are the voice of heav'n?"
And carol, smil'd the Lovely One of heav'n,
Now knoweth he, that the degrees of heav'n
For well behoov'd, that, in some part of heav'n,
Was rais'd aloft, and made the guest of heav'n.
In mortal ears the mystery of heav'n."
Of twilight, new appearances through heav'n
That were below, ere they arriv'd in heav'n,
And seems some star that shifted place in heav'n,
And know'st not thou, whatever is in heav'n,
Sheds more resplendence, elsewhere less.  In heav'n,
     Then saw I clearly how each spot in heav'n
Soothing me:  "Know'st not thou, thou art in heav'n?
This fair dame round, who strengthens thee for heav'n.
And I did bear impression of this heav'n,
Such weal is in the love, that stills this heav'n;
Nor let him trust the fond belief, that heav'n
And wafted on into the swiftest heav'n.
Surpass our usage, as the swiftest heav'n
Expects the sun; nor ever, till the dawn,
Sizii and Arigucci yet were drawn.
What web it was, through which she had not drawn
And she, so distant, as appear'd, look'd down,
Long as it suited the unripen'd down
Of Beatrice's name, did bow me down
I' th' holy office long; but thrust him down
I at those accents saw the splendours down
In th' everlasting Justice as low down,
As to outstrip feet younger than thine own,
The shape, which in this mirror shall be shown."
In which thy thoughts, or ere thou think'st, are shown.
That taper's radiance, to whose view was shown,
Our Veronica, and the while 't is shown,
Than in the other part the ray is shown,
That bows its lithe top till the blast is blown;
At what of them I tell thee, whose renown
In thee,' so speak his anthem, 'who have known
From rock to rock transpicuous, making known
To me, as thoroughly I to thee am known.''
Have made it worthy reverence.  Not unknown
Than such, to whom his name was never known.
And here the lilies, by whose odour known
I would not wait thy asking, wert thou known
Who draws the bound, its limit only known.
Already on my temples beam'd the crown,
Surpassing, who themselves did make the crown,
The next, and whereon thy belief hath grown."
Do leave the knot untied: so hard 't is grown
Who place obtain for merit of their own,
Deserts, and has a byway of his own:
The hollow'd wrestler, gentle to his own,
How bitter can spring up, when sweet is sown."
Next answer'd:  "Conscience, dimm'd or by its own
A single beam, its origin must own
The Alpine rocks, whence glide thy currents, Po!
Who knew my name were wont to call me Folco:
And that, which all the faithful hope, as I do,
To Colchos, wonder'd not as ye will do,
Is wrapt in mist.  Look then if she may do,
Became a queen; and this for him did Romeo,
How they are gone, and after them how go
Thy kindred appellation comes, and who,
Is sometimes quitted by the creature, who
The third in order, underneath her, lo!
On th' other part, facing to Peter, lo!
Whether invisible to eye or no,
Consult your teacher, and he tells you 'no."'
The web is now a-warping.  Feltro too
The fervour, which it kindles; and that too
Where our desire did dwell: and round thee so,
So lifted I my gaze; and bending so
In different pow'rs resolves itself; e'en so
"They hope in thee," first heard we cried: whereto
Existent, looking at the point whereto
My brethren, Eliseo and Moronto.
One yet a babbler, loves and listens to
Were neighbours to you, and that at Galluzzo
Throughout these orbs, the mountain, and the deep,
Clear and unmov'd, and flowing not so deep
Therewith agreeing," heard I answer'd, "keep
Thy liberal bounty still toward me keep.
Sow'd the good seed, whose harvest now they keep.
To preach the Gospel, let the gospel sleep,
The dame, who was his surety, in her sleep
That e'en till death they may keep watch or sleep
Are one.  So that as we from step to step
As thou beholdest now, from step to step,
     "In such compos'd and seemly fellowship,
Of minstrel music, dulcimer, and help
Then, with sage doctrine and good will to help,
Believ'd in him, who had the means to help,
"That in this court," said I, "O sacred lamp!
     Through diver passages, the world's bright lamp
Of Beatrice, and that saintly lamp,
That circumcision in the males should imp
And Ardinghi, and Bostichi.  At the poop,
Arisen, now in round, now lengthen'd troop,
Of satisfaction, for he could not stoop
To what a vile conclusion must thou stoop!
To rue the gathering in of their ill crop,
And after bear the rose upon its top;
And, as one handling skillfully the harp,
Or other's shame, will feel thy saying sharp.
Triangle with each corner, blunt or sharp.
     I was not ware that I was wafted up
Assur'd me; and mine eyes I lifted up
He had, through thirst of martyrdom, stood up
No ill had power to harm, I saw rear'd up,
So multiplied in thee, it leads thee up
Thou know'st, who by thy light didst bear me up.
I shall forthwith return, and, standing up
Of equal clearness, like the brightening up
Of your sublunar world, was taken up,
But light transparent--did I summon up
So sharp, no lid, unclosing, may bear up
Thou, whose broad stamp is on them, higher up
Remembrance there needs none to gather up
had not ill lording which doth spirit up
     "If such one wheel of that two-yoked car,
With greeting such, as Rome, was first to bear,
Not for themselves, but for their kindred dear,
Temper'd of thee and measur'd, charm'd mine ear,
Of other's failing, shrinks with maiden fear;
     To whom I thus:  "It is enough: no fear,
Both wise and simple, even all, who hear
No longer new or strange to thee to hear,
Desire, ne'er since extinct in me, to hear
Of memory in me, and endure to hear
Sang, with such melody, as but to hear
Count it not hard henceforth, when thou dost hear
And men may mingle for thee when they hear."
In one triangle not contain'd, so clear
Proportion'd to its power, the dusk or clear."
True love, that ever shows itself as clear
For thou, who figur'st them in shapes, as clear,
Who soar'st so high a pitch, thou seest as clear,
That blessed spirit may not lie; since near
Impenitent, tho' scourg'd.  The hour is near,
Or why to thee more joyous I appear,
But, that what now appears not, may appear
And Norcera with Gualdo, in its rear
With so divine a song, that fancy's ear
And with lean abstinence, through many a year,
Not from the centre of the sea so far
Nor thought of man hath ever reach'd so far,
Have peace; and in a circle spreads so far,
Of creature, as may well be thought, so far
Erewhile had hail'd me.  Forthwith brighter far
The flavour, which, not tasted, passes far
That thou mayst penetrate the brightness, far
And of the light that vests me, I thus far
New-garmented; nor from those billows far,
 In judgment, further off from him by far,
As high he, disobeying, thought to soar:
(Whose height what reach of mortal thought may soar?)
Degenerates most, been stepdame unto Caesar,
Grew brighter at her smiles; and, if the star
And, as the bright dimensions of the star
That made me seem like needle to the star,
Through silvery whiteness of that temperate star,
Embellish'd, as the sun the morning star;
Each soul restor'd to its particular star,
The lively flame dilates, and like heav'n's star
Cover'd of Libra and the fleecy star,
Unto the banners, that do levy war
And that 't is lain upon a mortal shoulder,
To that emprize, that first made Neptune wonder
Had not so much suspended me with wonder,
Wist what it spake, so deaf'ning was the thunder.
Might seem a rent cloud when it grates the thunder,
Unto the region of the highest thunder,
Were mov'd to gladness, what then was my cheer,
Thy judgment, that the human nature ne'er
Toward the bliss supreme.  And I, who ne'er
Saw her so glorious and so just, that ne'er
Beyond time's limit or what bound soe'er
Have mov'd me to the blazon of a peer
Of this sweet flow'r: near whom behold the seer,
The hearts of monks so wanton: for whate'er
If necessary with contingent e'er
For thy paternal greeting.  This howe'er
Above the vulgar, grateful I refer;
Than now for him, my prayers to thee prefer,
And inasmuch as we must needs infer
He hath endow'd.  Hence now thou mayst infer
Who still to worth has been a willing stranger.
Within the span of Juno's messenger,
E'en thou wentst forth in poverty and hunger
Wherein the holy church defended her,
     If all, that hitherto is told of her,
Was sever'd, smil'd reminding me of her,
Abateth most his speed; that, seeing her
To sit in Dido's bosom: and from her,
Of pudency, that stain'd it; such in her,
     Beatrice upward gaz'd, and I on her,
Yet may I speak; that, as I gaz'd on her,
While they with upward eyes do look on her;
From whence my voice thou hear'st; more thanks to her.
Mature, when first engender'd!  Ancient father!
' Hail Virgin!' to the throes, by which my mother,
Sought the celestial guide, and were by her
His body laid upon another bier.
As was behooveful for such questioner,
She was inspir'd to name him of his owner,
Equal returns.  Those, glorious, who pass'd o'er
Who one commendeth. which of them so'er
And I speak of him, as the labourer,
And was appointed to perform thereafter,
Egidius bares him next, and next Sylvester,
Which late we told of, the great minister
Thou wear this corollary.  Nature ever
For its own flame the torch this fitting ever!
But, that the love, which keeps me wakeful ever,
The universal form: for that whenever
So sweetly, the delight hath left me never.
To first offence the doubting Guenever.
Saw in one volume clasp'd of love, whatever
But nature renders it imperfect ever,
Of old Anchises, in the' Elysian bower,
E'en as the bird, who midst the leafy bower
So plenteously, that I on others shower
The sweet refreshing, of that heav'nly shower.
Engenders and expands the cursed flower,
And as they flitted down into the flower,
Before the sun, when the consummate flower
A day new-ris'n, as he, who hath the power,
Is in composure settled by the power
Who pure intelligence were made: mere power
Free wholly, uncontrollable by power
As fancy doth present them.  Be thy power
Illume me, so that I o'ercome thy power
For all mine eyes have seen, I, to thy power
Her grace, whose might can help thee. Thou in prayer
Of frozen vapours streams adown the air,
Shines Romeo's light, whose goodly deed and fair
In this eternal springtide blossom fair,
O'erpowering vision in me!  But so fair,
Is from its top, whose fruit is ever fair
Turning to me, with aspect glad as fair,
Beams in your countenance, wond'rous fair,
Now D. now I. now L. figur'd I' th' air.
Therein she resteth, e'en as in his lair
A blast, that scours the sky, forthwith our air,
Did move away, and mix; and with the choir
Then heard I echoing on from choir to choir,
That of his temple Janus barr'd the door.
Twelve fold to him for ten.  Aged and poor
One rich eternally, the other poor.
     She somewhat smil'd, then spake:  "If mortals err
Of error; others well aware they err,
     Next issued from the deep imbosom'd splendour:
Much weeping seal'd.  No purpose was of our
What circuit thou hast compass'd."  From the hour
Rued its stern bearing.  After, near the hour,
Of the horizon.  As at an evening hour
Which thou must witness ere thy mortal hour,
To win her bridegroom's love at matin's hour,
To know their state.  "O born in happy hour!
If to excel be worthy man's endeavour,
Adown the breathing tresses of the flow'r
In the confusion of its persons, as
To mine he came devolv'd.  Caesar I was,
He might be construed, as indeed he was,
Holds now remembrance none of what she was.
Helm'd to right point; and such our Patriarch was.
He, nearest on my right hand, brother was,
Deceived and ill dispos'd: and I it was,
Was or can be, such as in them it was.
That hath made wander both the sheep and lambs,
My beauty, which the loftier it climbs,
Either before or after the blest limbs
     "The virtue and motion of the sacred orbs,
Of him, who sets us here, which in these orbs
And yet contain'd within it.  The other orbs
Both this and much beside of these our orbs,
Things generated, which the heav'nly orbs
Which paints it, when most dense the vapour spreads,
And if thou note the point, whence each proceeds,
And hence the beam, that from without proceeds,
So strongly from this star, that of his deeds
To give it rule, behold the valorous deeds
Endurance should he shorten'd by thy deeds.
Hath undone!  and in all her goodly deeds
And deeply, that beginning, which he needs,
Hath risen,' which no small distinction needs.
     "Yea," answer'd I;  "nor here a reason needs."
As mallet by the workman's hand, must needs
Counts not the act, oh then how great must needs
Vouchsaf'd to clothe him in terrestrial weeds.
Our shape, regarmented with glorious weeds
Is kindled, and the virtue that it sheds;
"Splendour eternal, piercing through these folds,
Hath colours fine enough to trace such folds.
The intellectual efficacy unfolds
Victorious he his mighty triumph holds,
"Hosanna," to the fixed point, that holds,
Whose cough embolden'd (as the story holds)
Swaying the world, till through successive hands
Committed glory, e'en into his hands,
On the third Caesar look; for to his hands,
The ken, your world is gifted with, descends
Are blessed, even as their sight descends
So that 't is hard to see which more offends.
Immediate rules, and Nature, awed, suspends
Is built; and therefore substance it intends.
It is the mighty ocean, whither tends
Yet envy not thy neighbours: time extends
That on the dexter of the cross extends,
He to that heav'n, at which the shadow ends
This the brute earth together knits, and binds.
Which from the midmost to the bound'ry winds;
Before the Spiritual court, by nuptial bonds,
Plac'd me high garden, from whose hounds
Their beamy circlets, dancing to the sounds.
Keep silence here, pervading with such sounds
That made him peer among the ocean gods;
     The eyes, that heav'n with love and awe regards,
No less a mark than million.  He, who guards
As Jove might be, if he and Mars were birds,
In the bright garland, which, admiring, girds
More rapid than the motion, which first girds
In the most secret council, with his lords
When the Most Holy suffer'd.  Then the words
Who cheer'd me with her comfortable words!
Resolve so steadfast dwells.  And by these words
And Beatrice after him her words
Of the mind's impress; not that aught thy words
     "My liege, it doth enhance the joy thy words
Goddess!  "I straight reply'd, "whose lively words
Are rare.  With this distinction take my words;
She added, "if thou wish thy cure, my words,
I soon will free thee; so thou mark my words;
Now let thine eyes wait heedful on my words,
The other trine, that with still opening buds
E'en what remembrance keeps, than could the babe's
That of these natures he might count the tribes.
A unit for his virtue, for his vices
     "Know thou, that, from the first, these substances,
Of all intelligential substances
Since it befalls, that in most instances
Mirror'd, as 't were in new existences,
The sun doth sometimes hide him, safe abides
Were shrin'd within his heart.  And yet there hides
Have been afforded in Parmenides,
Before you in the wave, that on both sides
Sparkles innumerable on all sides
Words grievous, though I feel me on all sides
Others to hoist them.  Down the palfrey's sides
Hath none to guide him; of himself he guides;
Behind thee now conceal'd.  The Good, that guides
For space is none to bound, nor pole divides,
That hath so many lights, this being divides,
With light supplies them in as many modes,
In that I told thee, of beatitudes
Hover'd around; and, like a troop of bees,
That mouldy mother is where late were lees.
That plays the dragon after him that flees,
So in our life the different degrees
And the upstartled wight loathes that be sees;
But to receive the grace, which heav'n vouchsafes,
Set upon sold and lying privileges;
E'en such am I: for all the vision dies,
As is the bantling, that of hunger dies,
Already stretched under our feet there lies:
Of the deprav'd Italian land, which lies
Of the great shield, wherein the lion lies
Nor miss of the reproof, which that implies,
Their energy to save: for nought, that lies
What thou hast ask'd: for in th' abyss it lies
And that, which, in their circles, none who spies,
When lo!  as one who, in a mirror, spies
Made beauteous by so many luminaries,
From an eye-witness to heav'n's mysteries."
The universe unfolds; all properties
But is a stranger to its properties,
Whatever it creates and nature makes."
With many strings, a pleasant dining makes
Have order; and from hence the form, which makes
Against God's pleasure, than that fruit which makes
Its energy so sinks, at last it makes
That moves, which being hence and vigour takes,
Yet this, offensive as it is, provokes
To judge at distance of a thousand miles
Noon's fervid hour perchance six thousand miles
     As in the calm full moon, when Trivia smiles,
The firmament looks forth serene, and smiles;
By those brief words, accompanied with smiles,
     Sweet love!  that dost apparel thee in smiles,
Led unto her: and from her radiant smiles,
In the other little light serenely smiles
From Athens, by his cruel stepdame's wiles,
How lustrous was thy semblance in those sparkles,
And let not with his Guelphs the new-crown'd Charles
After solution of my doubt, thy Charles,
As might have made one blest amid the flames,
Or more of love is witness'd in those flames:
Were in delusion lost.  These other flames,
Bandied about more frequent, than the names
That, ere he died, saw all the grievous times
For, in that upper clime, effulgence comes
And give it inward keeping.  Knowledge comes
Along the spires, where each hour sooner comes;
There, under shadow of his sacred plumes
Who for such lofty mounting has with plumes
Innumerable lights wherein one shines.
Raban is here:  and at my side there shines
That after doth increase by loving, shines
It can be known but where day endless shines.
Which gives out flame, yet it its whiteness shines
Are chief of all the greatest.  This, that shines
How in thine intellect already shines
The virtue mingled through the body shines,
Almost to level on our earth declines;
Above th' horizon, where the sun declines;
Among the first of those barefooted meek ones,
Of fleshly warfare, to behold the thrones
Eyeing the light, on more than million thrones,
     After the precious and bright beaming stones,
Rich men and beggars interchanging fortunes.
As not to let the tongues e'en of his foes
     Like as a virgin riseth up, and goes,
Is as the leaf upon the bough; that goes,
Inform me; that I may set forth the shapes,
Shall face thee, which thy questioning declares
E'en as the tenour of my song declares.
And the rejoicing spirits, like to spheres
From winter's calendar, these heav'nly spheres
Of new delight, the man, who perseveres
Be noted steadfastly: for of the fires,
Ebullient shot forth scintillating fires:
That ever the first virtue fram'd, admires
Beginning, to what point thy soul aspires:
Glows vigorous yet within me, and inspires
But this our life the' eternal good inspires
As one, who in perplexity desires
Backward return with speed, and your own shores
With all this laughter on its bloomy shores,
That to himself the other arrogates:
I do but speak of it, my soul dilates
This is the formal cause, that generates
     "And may that be, if different estates
For this it was enjoin'd the Israelites,
Of grace hath come, without baptismal rites
For worship set apart and holy rites."
On to the summit prompts us.  This invites,
It warbled, and did say:  "As are my notes
Pursued, intently, as the eye pursues
A second crown, to deck their Guardian's virtues,
In the refining wave; and, as the eaves
Learn too, that downward from the step, which cleaves
Thou hast good cause to cry, "My heart so cleaves
Has to the skies return'd.  How wide the leaves
Is left a profitless stain upon the leaves;
Come to the foot, and crown myself with leaves;
That Rhone, when he hath mix'd with Sorga, laves.
That canst not lift thy head above the waves
Light flowing, from whose amber-seeming waves
From where the Trento disembogues his waves,
E'en as the truth that man at first believes.
That burns amongst us, what thy mind conceives,
According to the virtue it conceives,
He comes, and to the worldly wax best gives
The festival of Thomas still revives)
Dost see contingencies, ere in themselves
"Who voucheth to thee of the works themselves,
Thou seest, were lowly to confess themselves
Removable: nor think to cleanse ourselves
All things, that appertain t' ye, like yourselves,
As in that image many were the loves,
From circle to the centre, water moves
And then concluded:  "For this cause behooves,
I have discover'd to thee, yet behooves
More lively than that, and so preserves
The will it had to pleasure me.  The eyes
Betwixt the former pair, shall meet thine eyes;
In the fifth radiance.  Open now thine eyes
Beyond our mortal wont, I fix'd mine eyes
Had stream'd unto me: therefore were mine eyes
Back with redoubled ardour were mine eyes
To make the better mirrors of mine eyes
Of all its goodly state: e'en so mine eyes
Of that enchantment.  When he saw mine eyes
Accounting less the pleasure of those eyes,
Unfolded, dashes from the blinding eyes
But soon as in this heav'n his doubting eyes
And as some cliff, that from the bottom eyes
Like the accordant twinkling of two eyes,
Amazement waited me; for in her eyes
From blest Ubaldo's chosen hill, there hangs
The spirit to his proem added things
They emblem: not that, in themselves, the things
Replied:  "I see that thou believ'st these things,
One universal smile it seem'd of all things,
Then thus began:  "Among themselves all things
     "This sacrifice in essence of two things
Which fashions like itself all lovely things.
     "What may the Persians say unto your kings,
Peter and Paul live yet, and mark thy doings.
His uncle and his brother's filthy doings,
Which moves thee, is less harmful; for it brings
Each one, who bears the sightly quarterings
Between Rialto, and the fountain-springs
Quirinus of so base a father springs,
Ought not to pierce thee; since thou find'st, the wings
Before my sight appear'd, with open wings,
To Nazareth, where Gabriel op'd his wings.
That rears his head, and claps him with his wings,
The ever-blessed image wav'd its wings,
Of sorrow well-deserv'd shall quit your wrongs.
Meek ancestress of him, who sang the songs
Waxing in splendour, burst forth into songs,
For what so precious in the balance weighs,
Such satisfaction offer'd, as outweighs
Rebuk'd the stubborn nations.  The three nymphs,
Therefore your steps have wander'd from the paths."
The rovers' titles--Poverty and Francis.
Is how to shine: e'en they, whose office is
But in the sensible world such diff'rence is,
The essence then, where such advantage is,
Such good of mine is spoken.  Where one is,
To thee, who understand'st them not, such is
With equal sum of gratitude: be his
Said I, "blest Spirit!  Therefore will of his
The divine will, by which our wills with his
This way distinction make: e'en so on his,
His stripling choice: and he did make her his,
     "Whence, noting that, which I have said, and this,
If thou wouldst tell me of thy name, and this
Depart from Florence.  This they wish, and this
Each circuiting, more beautiful.  Round this
Experience inequality like this,
The universe resemble God.  In this
Their fat and leanness, in like manner this
Turning the shepherd to a wolf.  For this,
As who should say, "My errand was for this."
Consents to that which forceth, not for this
Beneath another standard: ill is this
And of our well-beloved.  And let this
A sun upon the world, as duly this
Whose affirmation, or denial, is
Since to appearance his intention is
My course here bounded, as each artist's is,
Is, with the sight of all the good, that is,
Infuse into me, mighty as it is,
Discerns it not; and ne'ertheless it is,
Deeper into the truth, wherein rest is
Which here abides not?  Earth my body is,
As is the sky that sways him.  That he speaks,
     With all the heart, and with that tongue which speaks
A little stuff may furnish out their cloaks.
And Quintius nam'd of his neglected locks,
And, with no artful colouring on her cheeks,
In folly, that great leader of the Greeks:
Our language.  And as birds, from river banks
Was nearest, as partaking most, methinks,
That, if mine eyes had turn'd away, methinks,
Then turn'd to Beatrice, and in her looks
And with mine eyes my soul, that in her looks
Its amorous dalliance with my lady's looks,
But she as light'ning beam'd upon my looks:
The track, our ventrous keel must furrow, brooks
Beatrice look'd with eyes that shot forth sparks
Within that Jovial cresset, the clear sparks
With it mov'd also; and like swiftest sparks,
Fly without wings.  Nor only him who asks,
And with how vehement desire it asks
Met ill acceptance.  But the Provencals,
Reflected, which behind it lead conceals.
With finite number infinite conceals.
But he, who is aware those living seals
This prompts the hearts of mortal animals,
Are the sole study.  Pope and Cardinals,
(Where helice, forever, as she wheels,
Render sweet harmony among these wheels.
Yet holds him from observance; for these wheels
     Her eyes fast fix'd on the eternal wheels,
Therefore the circle, whose swift course enwheels
In circles each about the other wheels,
As their eternal phases each impels.
The heart he had, begging his life by morsels,
Of the fair bride, who with the lance and nails
From pasture, fed with wind: and what avails
Whose base affection many a spirit soils,
All beauteous things eternal.  What distils
'Twixt one or other household.  Hence befalls
Foretaste of that, which from your table falls,
     "Between Tupino, and the wave, that falls
Their traffic in that sanctuary, whose walls
Into the narrow circuit of your walls.
This revelation to us, where he tells
The nature, in whom naught unequal dwells,
With the bright summit of that horn which swells
Saw Loire and Seine, and every vale, that fills
Forth from the havens stretch'd unto the hills.
Caesar or bard (more shame for human wills
Due from the pole, round which the first wheel rolls,
From the fair Cyprian deity, who rolls
Sabellius, Arius, and the other fools,
Heard vain disputers, reasoners in the schools,
Nor dares to question, when amid those pearls,
Sufficeth all.  O ye misguided souls!
First enter'd on the faith which maketh souls
Of my sweet guide, who smiling shot forth beams
A wreath reflecting of eternal beams.
The fountain at whose source these drink their beams,
Five hundred fifty times and thrice, its beams
To manifest his glory by its beams,
More grateful to its author, whose bright beams,
Its native shores Antandros, and the streams
So, round about me, fulminating streams
So, at his sudden waking, he misdeems
     "That, to the eye of man, our justice seems
Of her high beauty, that all fire he seems."
Array them in their flight, greeting, as seems,
     "Cause too thou findst for doubt, in that it seems,
      Sweet star!  what glorious and thick-studded gems
At which the dart of my intention aims.
Through Moses, the rapt Prophets, and the Psalms.
In Christ divides them.  On this part, where blooms
I gave me wholly, and consign'd mine arms
Of my wise teacher, he, whom Mary's charms
Well pleas'd, and then enfoldeth in his arms
And like to babe, that stretches forth its arms
Until the Baptist, fit to carry arms,
Of his return to life, than had the terms
Beguil'd the credulous nations; but, in terms
"Behooves thee sift more narrowly thy terms,
The judgment of Timaeus, who affirms
How, when ye shall regain your visible forms,
The fondness, that stirs in him and conforms
Which to his gracious pleasure love conforms.
Given now such aid, that to retrace your forms
For statues one, and one for aphorisms
As makes all likeness scant.  But will and means,
     "Man in himself had ever lack'd the means
Thou hast to freedom brought me; and no means,
Than from its state in Paradise; nor means
That essence, which discovers by what means
The walls, for abbey rear'd, turned into dens,
Makes with the precious body it enlivens,
And Infangato were good citizens.
Has peopled this fair realm with citizens,
Now in their wane, illustrious citizens:
     Him, who lives ever, and for ever reigns
T' have rang'd themselves in fashion of two signs
Here were they shown thee, not that fate assigns
     "Now, to fulfil each wish of thine, remains
Over such countless mirrors, yet remains
(He who endur'd the desert and the pains
The merit of his soul-impassion'd strains
All he hath seen forgets; yet still retains
Is in the church's keeping, all pertains.
Ran purely through the last mechanic's veins.
Rises to mortals, but through that which joins
Therefore who follow him, as he enjoins,
Made promise of the way her sect enjoins.
From range to range, fanning their plumy loins,
Has cost; what favour for himself he wins,
So fiercely), as along the eternal twins
No longer than what time Latona's twins
Still makes the fathers chary to their sons,
Bark'd off in hell, and by Perugia's sons
Might grace her triumph with them.  On the horns
In heav'n-ward musings.  Rich were the returns
As that its bed is dark, the shape returns
Where never any with good will returns,
To go about the vineyard, that soon turns
That, which digested rightly after turns
I turn'd me, like the chill, who always runs
Of substance, measure, thou shalt see the heav'ns,
Who so renown'd a nation and two crowns
Doth well her art, but no distinctions owns
With gentle voice and mild, such as perhaps
     The robe, that with its regal folds enwraps
Discern'd, when one its even tenour keeps,
Was William, whom that land bewails, which weeps
The tribe of lowly ones, that trac'd HIS steps,
The higher creatures see the printed steps
Along this ladder, down whose hallow'd steps
So lofty was the summit; down whose steps
Astounded, to the guardian of my steps
In silence waited not: for to my lips
In thine epistle, fell on me the drops
When through the hundredth in his reck'ning drops
So thickly studded, in the depth of Mars,
All those, who in that time were there from Mars
Been perfect, such as once upon the bars
In the great Lombard's courtesy, who bears
"Arise and conquer," as to one who hears
Doth glitter in me.''  As the master hears,
Such fables Florence in her pulpit hears,
     Perhaps my saying over bold appears,
     Then I:  "What various here above appears,
The more the doer's good intent appears,
Against the universal ensign rears
     Here are the treasures tasted, that with tears
And not to perish, ere these hundred years
Were sponsors for him more than thousand years
Took the last Signet, which his limbs two years
That moves the sun in heav'n and all the stars.
Its goodness multiplied throughout the stars;
If th' intellectual powers, that move these stars,
And enter'd its precinct.  O glorious stars!
This harder find to deem, why of thy peers
Display'd in this brief song.  The characters,
Who scarce would grant the heav'nly ministers
Whence I address them:  "O perennial flowers
     "Descending hence unto the lowest powers,
In which couldst thou have understood their prayers,
Unwound and tighten'd, flow to righteous prayers
Was in its strength: and to the curule chairs
For, mounting these eternal palace-stairs,
That on the right hand of our successors
Say then, my honour'd stem!  what ancestors
Sparkles instinct with life; and in the flow'rs
And turneth to resolve him, if the glass
Must be pour'd back, as colour comes, through glass
Bewilder'd in deep maze.  The way I pass
'I will make all my good before thee pass.'
Its contrary no further lets it pass.
That yet was new to me, from the recess,
Distinguish'd into greater lights and less,
Slew his own mother, so made pitiless
     With fixed heed, suspense and motionless,
Trangress'd, from these distinctions fell, no less
Greater to more, and smaller unto less,
In circling motion. rapid more or less,
Alike distributed, or more, or less.
Partaking of sweet life, as more or less
Were its departure distant more or less,
     "Thou art so near the sum of blessedness,"
Who shook the world: nor aught her constant boldness
And better to denote his littleness,
Perennial, which in bright expansiveness,
To the design of art, through sluggishness
Their course shall so evince their brutishness
     Then saw I a bright band, in liveliness
With such addition grac'd of loveliness,
Into  its orb; but the new loveliness
Gives birth to flowers and fruits of holiness.
Created beings all in lowliness
It ne'er can warp to any wrongfulness.
That mortal, who was at his birth impress
Of many, singly as of one express,
Mind cannot follow it, nor words express
Whose people, by the shepherd's fault, possess
Exhaustless riches and unmeasur'd bliss.
As to the good, whose plenitude of bliss
Of my words only, but that to such bliss
     All there, who reign in safety and in bliss,
The chiefest nobles.  Those, highest in bliss,
Did leave the keys, which of this wondrous bliss
Sole with my lady, to more lofty bliss
Yet to shun peril they have done amiss:
Is grappled to thy soul."  I did not miss,
A falcon flying.  Last, along the cross,
This he, into whose keeping from the cross
Whereby with Christ she mounted on the cross,
That of feet nail'd already to the cross.
Instructed by my words, the dread abyss.
When from the midmost of this blue abyss
One from the barrier of the dark abyss,
Ere I descended into hell's abyss,
And toil'd me with the change.  In that abyss
Hardanapalus, to exhibit feats
Of olives, easily I pass'd the heats
Have not in any other heav'n their seats,
I to myself impute, by equal doubts
The honour and the blame in human acts,
And all his inclinations and his acts,
Their changes and their various aspects
May be remark'd of different aspects;
The sacred strain must leap, like one, that meets
Of Bindi and of Lapi in her streets.
Nor let the Jew, who dwelleth in your streets,
Wailings and groans in Famagosta's streets
Betwixt Pelorus and Pachynian heights,
     As when the ring-dove by his mate alights,
The ray and motion of the sacred lights,
To ask of thee, whom also it delights;
Their new-found pastures; so, within the lights,
Transporting from that realm: and of these lights
Was silent; for that all those living lights,
Who spake with me among the other lights
And, as it ended, all the other lights
For wisest, who esteems it least: whose thoughts
     She ended, and appear'd on other thoughts
And prove thou to me, that my inmost thoughts
And sweet regard gave birth to holy thoughts,
With whom thou must be thrown into these straits.
Of all around him, till assurance waits
For there on each desire completion waits,
Shall, as the wind doth, smite the proudest summits;
     "This little star is furnish'd with good spirits,
Different virtues needs must be the fruits
Their living waters, and have fed its plants.
That makes Falicia throng'd with visitants!"
So faint of our impictur'd lineaments,
In their whole being.  But the elements,
How vain and inconclusive arguments
     "Philosophy," said I, ''hath arguments,
Glides freely, and no obstacle prevents.
Of the white raiment destin'd to the saints."
Through the blest quire, by Him, who here appoints
Of nature, that upon the world imprints
But tell, I pray thee, whence the gloomy spots
That when man offers, God well-pleas'd accepts;
Of newness with succession interrupts,
To perfect being started, like three darts
The greater is the body (if all parts
Whate'er of light, gratuitous, imparts
Be yours, ye Ghibellines, to veil your arts
As on her frenzied child a mother casts;
Spread their broad mantles, so as both the beasts
Remember ye be men, not senseless beasts;
Ere cheeks with down are sprinkled; he, that fasts,
Or hear.  And, as a pilgrim, when he rests
That mountain, at whose side Cassino rests,
Was won.  And, near unto the other, rests
It dwelt in Alba, up to those fell lists
'Gainst Brennus and th' Epirot prince, and hosts
Cried Beatrice, "the triumphal hosts
     Me seem'd as if a cloud had cover'd us,
Toward the realm of God's own form, bore us
Is to this swiftness wing'd. "To whom I thus:
Peter had then circled my forehead thus.
Its virtue to my vision knits, and thus
In turning to its whereabout, and thus
Than in their visage beaming.  Cinctur'd thus,
     "Why doth my face," said Beatrice, "thus
     "Within the pearl, that now encloseth us,
For tidings from the dumb.  When, singing thus,
In Ananias' hand.'' I answering thus:
E'en at the moment of its issuing; thus
With opposite motion and, conceiving thus,
"God of Sabaoth!  that does prank them thus!"
Of individual star, that charmst them thus,
To his requesting.  I have spoken thus,
As note is to its metre; even thus,
Our weaker thought, how one dimension thus
That I should rest.  To thy first question thus
Is nature's prompting: whether thus or thus,
No more to be o'erflow'd; about us thus
Temper so evenly affection in us,
Beginning:  "For that I was just and piteous,
I never shall account it marvelous,
     The song fulfill'd its measure; and to us
Mirrors, ye call them thrones, from which to us
Of that eternal triumph, know to us
In peerless beauty, 'mid th' eternal nympus,
Its inner hem and skirting over us,
Full more than thousand splendours towards us,
To put his hand to the first art, Donatus.
It wrought, is now by Cassius and Brutus
From vain excess to clear th' encumber'd laws.
     The increate perpetual thirst, that draws
But may some influence of your sacred dews
The appellation of that star, which views,
For ministries so high: therefore their views
With grace at pleasure variously endows.
Who of his spirit and of his offspring shows;
Thy thirst is next.  The saintly soul, that shows
That if there be in heav'n a realm, that shows
And thence with lustre, more or less, it shows
Your love seduces, 't is but that it shows
Beholds our queen, and so enamour'd glows
Now, clustering, where their fragrant labour glows,
And of its opposite.  He next, who follows
For Charles and Frederick living: now he knows
Fifth of the saintly splendours?  now he knows
Immediate thence, no end of being knows,
Receptacle unto that Good, which knows
The saintly folds, that shaded her fair brows.
Thus far hath one of steep Parnassus' brows
Is for this cause assign'd us, that our vows
Which thou hast such respect of.  In old days,
And put a period to your gladsome days,
Beneath its guidance, in their prime of days
Cannot to thee be dark.  Why then delays
And work on the foundation nature lays,
Wherewith the goodliest sapphire, that inlays
Shall bring to face it.  The eighth sphere displays
And mantling crimson, in two listed rays
"O spirit, born for joy!  who in the rays
Legions of splendours, on whom burning rays
Thy mortal puissance would from its rays
     It chanceth oft some animal bewrays,
The filth of paganism, and for their ways
That he, who in the sacred forum sways,
Is on the universe, of all its ways
Into whose keeping Christ did give the keys
And part upon their left; nor that the keys,
From whence ye drew your radiance and your heat,
Thy ken directed to the point, whereat
Unshaken:  the Sacchetti still were great,
As it hath grave beyond its virtue great.
So mighty art thou, lady!  and so great,
The rest were not an hundredth part so great.
Is turn'd: and thither now, as to our seat
A hundred years twice told and more, his seat
Was hunting; this the priesthood follow'd, that
"Why dazzlest thou thine eyes in seeking that,
"If I have power to show one truth, soon that
The universal frame answers to that,
"The valley' of waters, widest next to that
That 'twixt ye two, the contrary to that
Have made necessity; or whether that
Ne'er then was penalty so just as that
No longer stainless.  Sin alone is that,
Thy name;' and with my faith who know not that?
Right plainly, ponder, who he was, and what
Through the sleek cov'ring of his furry coat.
Where charity in soft persuasion sat,
     Although divested of my first-rais'd doubt,
Now make intelligent, clearing the doubt
Should be their glory.  Slow, and full of doubt,
Could be with justice punish'd:  from which doubt
Were given to no end.  And thence doth doubt
Thy thoughts, from whence they rise.  Thou art in doubt,
Which this betokens me, admits no doubt."
And Mercury, and Mars.  That other doubt,
There would assuredly be room for doubt
They stand, nor feel to fall.  For do not doubt,
     "Here, silent as thou art, I know thy doubt;
So different effects flow'd from one act,
His threefold operation, at one act
He makes the victim, and of his own act.
But of his light the beam, must needs attract
Are crude; but on thy part is the defect,
I' th' universal order, great defect
Nor only creatures, void of intellect,
Had of fair truth unveil'd the sweet aspect,
Thou shalt discern it only hath respect
From such belief our reasoning, all respect
     "I am thy root, O leaf!  whom to expect
All power well nigh extinct: or, from direct
Thy wonder of the mighty Architect,
Through  different essences, from it distinct,
Who sits so beautiful at Mary's feet.
The true and false oppos'd.  Soon as my feet
With the eye's spirit running forth to meet
More fair to look on, so with voice more sweet,
As 't were, away; and yet the sense of sweet,
The beauteous image, in fruition sweet
Sends out a tinkling sound, of note so sweet,
     I ended, and therewith a song most sweet
     Such keenness from the living ray I met,
May be in Spirit, or in angel, met:
Part of the Christian people should be set,
Each leaf in full maturity, are set
Course, and in happiest constellation set
That Trojan Ripheus in this round was set
Resum'd alternate:  "Need there is (tho' yet
Of chamber prowess.  Montemalo yet
To ask thee of other truth, that yet
More than the person did.  Time was not yet,
For we, who see our Maker, know not yet
Belov'd most dearly:  this is the first shaft
For not in process of before or aft
Blackness the other part; when to the left
Lustrous and costly, great renown hath left,
Such an hosanna sounded, as hath left
And merely in respect to his prime gift,
The clay was made, accomplish'd with each gift,
But at his own discretion none may shift
And trades and traffics, had been turn'd adrift
Nature in him, from bounty fall'n to thrift,
Are seraphim and cherubim.  Thus swift
Of all the seven, how bulky each, how swift;
"I come to aid thy wish.  Looking aloft
Voice answ'ring voice, so musical and soft,
Thy bounty succours, but doth freely oft
Which breathes from both eternal, the first Might
Yet therefore naught the more remov'd her Sight
Into my fancy, mine was form'd; and straight,
As one, who from a dream awaken'd, straight,
And, "Did I smile," quoth she, "thou wouldst be straight
They lack not weight."  I spake; and on me straight
Of that celestial furthest from the height.
And if our fantasy fail of such height,
And it is nature which from height to height
From the world's lowest gap unto this height.
Of torrent downwards from a mountain's height.
Which from its fairness doth discharge the weight
In equal balance poising either weight.
The other splendour of cherubic light.
Into the heav'n, that is unbodied light,
On mine; a point I saw, that darted light
The gates, at which she enter'd, and did light
The spirit wholly; thus the hallow'd light,
Whatever of buxomness and free delight
      "O thou of primal love the prime delight!
What space endur'd my season of delight;
Joy, that transcends all sweetness of delight.
Whereon thou lookst, began with such delight,
Of somewhat new to come fills with delight.
Tangled in net of sensual delight,
Firm, and susceptible of all delight."
Such scantiness of knowledge our delight:
And wond'rous note attested new delight.
Under whose summit thou didst see the light,
Another mystery.  Tell him, if the light,
At my right side, burning with all the light
Perchance, as is the halo from the light
Then turn'd them back, directed on the light
Assur'd, they turn'd again unto the light
I can reflect on thee."  Thereat the light,
Ill knew to guide, and on each part the light
Through sharp encounter of the nimble light,
The Rubicon, was of so bold a flight,
Lavinia's spouse, was leader of the flight,
Beyond the mark of mortals.  When the flight
Each evil in the scale, whate'er of light
Now covers.  Nor will such excess of light
Receiv'd us, as the wave a ray of light
Of reason to pursue the senses' flight
The arrow, seen beforehand, slacks its flight."
Interposition of such numerous flight
My soaring pennons in that lofty flight
To whom she thus:  "O everlasting light
Not that the semblance of the living light
Cours'd up and down along the living light,
To holy church his treasure.  The fifth light,
Wherever merited, celestial light
Is less than little.  Oh eternal light!
Compounded, yet one individual light
From hence proceeds, that which from light to light
And after through this heav'n from light to light,
Now, if thy mind's eye pass from light to light,
Thou hast allay'd, my son, within this light,
And here I glitter, for that by its light
The other comes and goes; so in that light
Weareth its proper hue of orient light.
And from the lesser orb the goodliest light,
Puts forth her radiant brow, all, light by light,
Engendereth loving; for that lively light,
     And now the visage of that saintly light
His annual journey; and, through every light
Avails not to resist.  Here is the might,
"Lo!  lo!  behold the peer of mickle might,
Both morn and eve, my soul, with all her might
Beams, in this hour, commingled with his might,
Has, in her nest, sat darkling through the night,
That they surcease not ever, day nor night,
This principle, not understood aright,
Translucent, solid, firm, and polish'd bright,
Is sovran."  Straight mine eyes I rais'd; and bright,
Thus chanting saw I turn that substance bright
Before me sat they down, so burning bright,
Our love shall shine around that raiment, bright,
Plac'd all his love below on just and right:
And on the coast secur'd it of the right.
Proves bitter to his seed; and, on the right,
New virtue into me infus'd, and sight
In seeing, not in  loving, which of sight
Is all depictur'd in the' eternal sight;
Sweet medicine to clear and strengthen sight,
"Mortal art thou in hearing as in sight;"
The grace divine, albeit e'en his sight
For, as the sun doth to the feeblest sight,
Unswervingly.  Thus place I in thy sight
     "God seeth all:  and in him is thy sight,"
Arriv'd, where wond'rous thing engag'd my sight.
I turn'd, and downward bent confus'd my sight.
Thus vanish'd gradually from my sight
Am her own faithful Bernard."  Like a wight,
     So forward stretch'd him (if of credence aught
Expatiates without bound.  Therefore, if aught
From his well doing, doth not helm him aught,
Thy triumph wholly, if thou waken aught
In sooth no will had I to utter aught,
Of such vicissitude in heaven I thought,
I will make answer even to the thought,
Of radiance, clear and lofty, seem'd methought,
Descending, ev'ry light in heav'n, methought,
Intent on these, ne'er journey but in thought
That of confession I no longer thought.
That nearer to the level of our thought
If one with steady eye and perfect thought
I turn'd, but ah!  how trembled in my thought,
And such profession:  "As good Christian ought,
     "If violence be, when that which suffers, nought
And fix its faith, unless the instance brought
E'en when she to the world again was brought
The servant, who hath joyful tidings brought,
     "But all the mighty standard yet had wrought,
And in that space so variously hath wrought,
To Christian, and no miracle been wrought,
Did Rome consign it; and what then it wrought
flow merely in her saintly looks it wrought.
The torrent Rhone.  What after that it wrought,
In Dionysius so intently wrought,
But his who fills it basely), he besought,
Distends, and he has won the meed he sought:
To rob another, and another sought
And in the spleen unfolded what it sought.
Did lighten on me, that whatever bait
The question, to approve, and not to end it;
Or ere another, circling, compass'd it,
Nor is there aught thou seest, that doth not fit,
One wak'd to tend the cradle, hushing it
Have rais'd assurance in me, wakening it
One circle, light and love, enclasping it,
Each to the' intelligence that ruleth it,
Was honour'd, it, and those consorted with it.
Justice consists in consonance with it,
For thou wilt see the point from whence they split,
     Before mine eyes stood the four torches lit;
That no created ken may fathom it.
My soul is fill'd, that gladness wells from it;
Like adamant, which the sun's beam had smit
With which it knits, as life in you is knit.
For that she favour'd first the high exploit
Were by enlight'ning grace and their own merit
Behold her on the throne, wherein her merit
Those burning splendours of the Holy Spirit
Who in desire or fear doth look for it.
As is through glass the hue that mantles it,
Were it not thus, these heavens, thou dost visit,
Doth own from him the virtue, fashions it.
And they who on their stools beneath her sit,
As man prevails o'er man; but conquers it,
And who art thou, that on the stool wouldst sit
She leaves to you, as ye do most affect it.
If that do mean, as men interpret it.
And wearied he, who ounce by ounce would weight it,
     She (such as I bequeath her to the bruit
So that the fleet run onward; and true fruit,
From good intent producing evil fruit:
According to his kind, hath better fruit,
Courteous will give; nor will the gift ill suit
E'en as Alcmaeon, at his father's suit
Thus, at the hearing of that pious suit,
Stretch their clasp'd hands, in furtherance of my suit!"
Sad Cleopatra, who, pursued by it,
Wisdom and love were in one measure dealt;
'T would deem the praise, it yields him, scantly dealt."
     Thus is one heat from many embers felt,
Pietro the sinner, when before I dwelt
Thousand save sev'nty times, the whilst I dwelt
Hath potency, the like to that which dwelt
In Borgo yet the Gualterotti dwelt,
Angelical, while yet in flesh it dwelt.
With miracles and martyrdoms were built.
He bare below!  tent this man, as thou wilt,
Shrink, as the leaf doth from the thunderbolt.
Shall sorrow for its godless shepherd's fault,
And needy is gone by, not through its fault,
Whence needs each lesser nature is but scant
The soul of every brute and of each plant,
The Pope recks little now.  Thy city, plant
He had been warier that the greedy want
     To Beatrice on my right l bent,
Of one, whose spirit, on high musings bent,
Nor aught so vast or so magnificent,
His hard intention he to Innocent
And I was with him, weetless of ascent,
Impurpled, well denoted our ascent.
Of his free bounty, sign most evident
Of Gratian, who to either forum lent
Lays forth its gradual blooming, redolent
In every water.  Either testament,
Thy span beyond their treason's chastisement."
That, indistinctly heard, with ravishment
What hath been told thee.--Lo!  the ambushment
That held me in so sweet imprisonment.
Which is of honour no light argument,
Different virtue compact different
Ere I had spoken, smiling, an assent,
Celestial, marking me no more intent
Though gay, yet innocent of worse intent,
Or when they clos'd.  As he, who looks intent,
The robe and veil they wear, to that intent,
Have held unceasingly their view, intent
Erewhile, with lilied crowning, well content
Of Nerli and of Vecchio well content
From that below.  But fully to content
Of summer and the winter frosts, content
Corporeal, doth proportion its extent
When thus by lady:  "Give thy wish free vent,
My valiant service.  After him I went
'T' imprint in me such love: for, of constraint,
Lo!  Where, with Beatrice, many a saint
Give rise to talk of Cain in fabling quaint?"
The triumph, which plays ever round the point,
Follow their hoops, in likeness to the point,
Thus I resolve thee of the greater point.
     "Did I advance no further than this point,
     Thus did he come, deducing to this point,
"Heav'n, and all nature, hangs upon that point.
As it comprises more of goodness in 't.
It prophesied.  When, at the sacred font,
Might still find page with this inscription on't,
In spite of her own will and better wont,
Never did babe, that had outslept his wont,
It rests the foot, but, as it still is wont,
As from the first a second beam is wont
Should scan such secret truth; for he had learnt
In number did outmillion the account
Approval met, that from their inmost fount
Of infinite mourning, and along the mount
And other comes instead.  Upon the mount
With Virgil the soul purifying mount,
Kindled, thy ken a higher flight shall mount;
And blessed makes this realm, which thou dost mount,
No unribb'd pinnace, no self-sparing pilot.
Wherein thou sittest, by eternal lot!
Or wherefore, worthy spirit!  for thy lot
Nor grudge myself the cause of this my lot,
Shed lightnings from above, yet saw I not
Of each created being, waited not
To such, as sue for heav'n's sweet sake, and not
Unjust, is argument for faith, and not
'I am as I was wont.'  Yet such were not
So fortune deals with Florence.  Hence admire not
Who, for the love of thing that lasteth not,
Admittance to the barn.  I question not
As centre in the round.  That which dies not,
That he who grace desireth, and comes not
So that it bears the mighty tide, and bursts not
The substance, that my ken endur'd it not.
He dates from Mars his lineage.  Were it not
More speedily to hear thee, tell it not "
That must befall his seed:  but, "Tell it not,"
Is grown so dainty, good beginnings last not
Both to the 'yea' and to the 'nay' thou seest not.
And fatten'd, not with all their help to boot,
To reilumine underneath the foot
That sorely sheet the region.  From one root
For every mind.  Thus happiness hath root
Dispose, for their own seed and produce apt.
Thereafter men, for ill than good more apt,
Of his free bounty, who had made them apt
Pietro Damiano there was I y-clept:
Whence I to question her became less prompt.
Your station here." Whence she, with kindness prompt,
And in such space as on the notch a dart
Of that strong cord, that never looses dart,
Are shut and rais'd together), from the heart
And therefore give no thanks, but in the heart,
     "You are my sire," said I, "you give me heart
Girt humbly: nor did abjectness of heart
Within the cloisters, and held firm their heart."
That sprang from it, still trickles in my heart.
Issued in form of words, such as my heart
This light from many a star visits my heart,
To mountain sped, at th' extreme bound, a part
Demands entire my thought.  Join'd with the part,
Which thou inquirest, either in some part
Pierces the universe, and in one part
When that the two assemblages shall part;
The offering, still to offer.  Th' other part,
As one who joys in kindness:  "In that part
'T were all too poor to utter the least part
Checkers the shadow, interpos'd by art
It is the eternal light of Sigebert,
"I am not worthy, of my own desert,
Should stint the measure of my fair desert?
That to the influencing of these orbs revert
Care not for this, the crowd that now are girt
The atomies of bodies, long or short,
Secure of censure, yet at bare report
That it may issue, bearing true report
That draw thee towards him; so that thou report
Which from a lion of more lofty port
A stony ridge ariseth, in such sort,
The will of the Most high; not in such sort
That weaves her zone.  In the celestial court,
That ended, through the high celestial court
To whose sweet anthem all the blissful court,
That a just vengeance was by righteous court
Who didst the largess of our kingly court
Were lamely so deliver'd; but the East,
And truly need there is, that he forecast,
With the resplendence of her own, that cast
And Nicosia's, grudging at their beast,
Affection springs in well-disposed breast;
For very eagerness towards the breast,
From the Pierian foliage, when one breast
That underneath the burning lion's breast
That yet is moisten'd at his mother's breast.
I ofttimes wail my sins, and smite my breast,
Of mighty Constance, who from that loud blast,
That power produc'd, which was the third and last."
And I, had there our birth-place, where the last
The covenant the other.  For the last,
Ran straight and speedy, perish at the last,
The first seems still, and, as it flew, the last;
"Long as the joy of Paradise shall last,
With him it ran e'en to the Red Sea coast;
Long tract of ages by the angels past,
From that soft winnowing.  Shadow none, the vast
The living justice, of the which thou mad'st
If thou no longer patiently abid'st
Diminish'd fades, intensest in the midst;
"In the first circles, they, whom thou beheldst,
This other splendid shape, which thou beholdst
True substances are these, which thou behold'st,
Cause thee to marvel, in that thou behold'st
Demands my further parle.  Inquire thou wouldst,
And not through its deserving.  As thou heard'st,
Elsewhere are fix'd, him worthiest call and best.
Four circles with the threefold cross, in best
As thou in every contradiction seest
The vase, wherein time's roots are plung'd, thou seest,
Tobias whole.  Unlike what here thou seest,
To search the meaning of what here thou seest,
That makes us ready servants, as thou seest,
See the whole vision be made manifest.
     I, though my doubting were as manifest,
The apostolic radiance, whose behest
To execute the counsel of the Highest.
Created his due station knew: those highest,
Assign'd me.  There, whence at thy lady's hest
Another brine, his offering to the priest,
To Simon Magus, where Magna's priest
That joy was in the eyes of all the blest.
As fervent; fervent, as in vision blest;
Here 'mid these other blessed also blest.
Who hath vouchsaf'd my asking, spirit blest!
And every line and texture of the nest
And said:  "Already satisfied, I rest
Starts; motionless the centre, and the rest
Augustin, Francis, Benedict, and the rest,
Who keepeth even footing with the rest."
Renew'd the strain.  Then parting from the rest
Of ne'er disturbed ether: for the rest,
     "O Lady!  thou in whom my hopes have rest!
     "First refuge thou must find, first place of rest,
That to please thee 't will be as sweet to rest."
The eye to follow it, erewhile at rest,
To vital nourishment.  The cry thou raisest,
With prompt affection welcometh the guest.
Genoan bounds from Tuscan.  East and west
On Juba; and the next upon your west,
Thou harbour'st, and from thence the virtue bring'st,
Of her soft smile, she spake:  "Turn thee, and list.
Dropp'd from its foil; and through the beamy list
Whom love did melt away, as sun the mist),
Where gainful merchandize is made of Christ,
Unto the visage most resembling Christ:
'Twixt Arno and the Tyber, he from Christ
Who hath not a believer been in Christ,
Here memory mocks the toil of genius.  Christ
But whoso takes his cross, and follows Christ
How dear he costeth not to follow Christ,
Of things not seen; and herein doth consist
As to myself, who own it, when thou lookst
If thou yet other cords within thee feel'st
They quitted not their bodies, as thou deem'st,
Lastly from thee I learn, who chief proclaim'st,
I pray thee, living topaz!  that ingemm'st
     "Fix now thine eye, intently as thou canst,
And, to the mortal world when thou return'st,
The army of Christ (which it so clearly cost
Who reigneth ever, for the drooping host
Our greater muse may claim) the pious ghost
When ye were gifted of the Holy Ghost.
Of stars fifteen, from midst the ethereal host
Here shalt thou look on either mighty host
By turns some star is to our vision lost.
Pursued her, when in dimness she was lost,
Thus in the winds on flitting leaves was lost
Only that, whence it kindles, none is lost,
Is darken'd.  And to dignity thus lost
Outgrew herself; and, in the transport lost.
By other's stairs, But that shall gall thee most
Are liveliest, which resemble him the most.
Thither for succour, where he trusteth most,
Which falls most heavily on him, who most
Those garlands twain, and to the innermost
     From that, which I did note in beauty most
Not from that day, when on this earth I first
Held, near the mountains, whence he issued first.
"The wound, that Mary clos'd, she open'd first,
So much, that venerable Bernard first
Urge equally; and therefore I the first
Reflected from the summit of the first,
Diligite Justitiam, the first,
As more in number distant from the first,
Must in its volume change the leaves.  The first,
Whole in itself and one, as at the first."
His soul with lively virtue, that when first
So that the sight sustain'd it not at first.
Was answer'd:  "if thou well discern, why first
Re'enter'd, still another rose.  "The thirst
That thou mayst use thyself to own thy thirst
Both one and other: and thou thence admir'st
And as the soul, that dwells within your dust,
And from the see (whose bounty to the just
From ire, that spurr'd him on to deeds unjust
Look elsewhere for the leaves.  O mortal lust!
And Beatrice next:  "Say on; and trust
     "Lift up thy head, and be thou strong in trust:
I leave in silence here:  nor through distrust
     O grace!  unenvying of thy boon!  that gav'st
Thou art not on the earth as thou believ'st;
Behooves thee to express, what thou believ'st,
Than have those spirits which so late thou saw'st;
Of life eternal, of that sweetness know'st
No Bacchus, and no Io Paean, but
Not merely to exceed our human, but,
Round Beatrice thrice it wheel'd about,
Of verdure and of flowers: so, round about,
     And lo!  forthwith there rose up round about
The Holy Spirit's song, and bare about
Only nine years have compass him about.
     As on her nest the stork, that turns about
Sufficient: not the number to search out
They came, and stay'd them; uttered them a shout
Impels it, inwardly, or from without.
And Urban, they, whose doom was not without
That, in a cloud imprison'd doth break out
The time prepar'd for thee.  Such as driv'n out
Found of recovery (search all methods out
The virtue of the heaven, and doles out
Smote fiercest, where resistance was most stout.
Through the deep brine ye fearless may put out
     "O saintly sister mine!  thy prayer devout
     I answered:  "Lady!  I with thoughts devout,
Then as a troop of maskers, when they put
That round them fleet, gazing the Godhead next,
Alas for you!--And lo!  toward me, next,
Rachel with Beatrice. Sarah next,
In clear refraction.  And that, which next
From the first hour, to that which cometh next
Answer'd the carols all.  Amidst them next,
Of those, who come to meddle with the text,
Which the good Father locks from none.  --And thou,
Are cover'd with one skin.  O patience!  thou
To be the effluence of that heav'n, which thou,
Of Pegasean race!  whose souls, which thou
And they may well consist with that which thou
Who canst do what thou wilt!  that in him thou
For my remaining enterprise Do thou
Five times absolve their round.  Consider thou,
Be steadfast, is not hid from thee: for thou
Lady of Heav'n!  will hover; long as thou
A space so ample, yet in brightness thou
From her celestial eyes.  "Wonder not thou,"
Hippolytus departed, such must thou
Ye mark not, they endure so long, and you
From former knowledge quite transmuting you.
Wherewith your substance blooms, shall stay with you
To testify against that evil law,
E'en so would stand a lamb between the maw
If aught approach them from without, do draw
And on the summit of the M. I saw
Mine eyes directing, as she will'd, I saw
The pow'r to look on him."  Forthwith I saw
With these and others like to them, I saw
Time covers, the first Florentines.  I saw
The whole.  And of such bond methinks I saw
His lady leave the glass.  The sons I saw
Its nimble fire."  Along the cross I saw,
Whose sixth orb now enfolded us.  I saw,
Of a fourth light, that now with us I saw.
Of sovran light.  Thenceforward, what I saw,
Conception birth!  Yet this to what I saw
Those flowers and sparkles, and distinct I saw
With such inveterate craving."  Straight I saw,
Their flame enliven, so that light I saw
All the first region overpast I saw,
Let him, who would conceive what now I saw,
They were, I turn'd mine eyes, and nothing saw;
Ere it was done:  then, at the naming saw
     Musing awhile I stood: and she, who saw
And in the likeness of a river saw
The Spaniard and the Indian, with the Jew.
Is Paradise, though with like gracious dew
When liberty return'd: but in too few
And to the shepherd cleave; but these so few,
"Propose the mark (which even now I view)
On Beatrice shine, with second view
And holds them still enraptur'd with the view.
Against its keenness.  The least star we view
Through zealous love to Mary: then in view
All their dispraise is written, spread to view?
Trac'd in my thoughts I may set forth to view,
"Contingency, unfolded not to view
Cast, from above, upon the flower, or view
This truth may stand more clearly in your view,
To other object, willingly, his view.
The primal virtue, kindling with bright view,
Must linger yet below.  Now raise thy view
But elsewhere now l bid thee turn thy view;
And so at giddy distance mocks thy view.
I pass'd, as I remember, till my view
Of love, that reign'd there, fashion to my view
Possess'd me, as soon as these had met my view,
There ever and anon, outstarting, flew
List'ning, till they have caught the strain anew:
Rain'd down upon the ancient bond and new,--
The shadow, streaming forth effulgence new,
The elder proposition and the new,
If the last bond be not within the new
The fuming of that incense, when I knew
Your right, usurping.  There, by that foul crew
One largest and most lustrous onward drew,
     So saying, to his assembly back he drew:
With intervenient disk, as she withdrew:
O'er million lamps a sun, from whom all drew
Can travel inward.  I, meanwhile, who drew
Towards it, deeming it their food; so drew
William, and Renard, and Duke Godfrey drew
But for the real manna, soon he grew
A hundred little spheres, that fairer grew
"Tell who ye are," I cried.  Forthwith it grew
Shine at my blandishments; and, as it grew
Within the range of that unerring bow,
That, which thou seest in the under bow,
Circumference so ample, that its bow,
And say, who level'd at this scope thy bow."
The decretals, as their stuft margins show,
Because I tell them, but discern'st not how;
In the round chalice, even as the blow
Toward me, ready to inflict the blow,
Of gladness, as here laughter: and below,
Ascending or descending here below,
That our infirm affection here below
And thus it answer'd:  "A short date below
In those rich-laden coffers, which below
Vouchsafe one glance to gild our storm below!
Alter not, when through pious prayer below
Their brightness downward, thousand miles below.
In shepherd's clothing greedy wolves below
Are those, which make thee beat thy wings below
With the two garments.  So report below."
Pure and without disguise, which they below,
With what a such whiteness did it flow,
For he among the fools is down full low,
Of th' everlasting statute sunk so low,
And this condition, which appears so low,
Obeying, in humility so low,
So heavenly, ran, yet deem'd his footing slow.
Therefore to recollect was I so slow.
They by the measure pac'd, or swift, or slow,
Straight or athwart, now rapid and now slow,
A Cincinnatus or Cornelia now.
Beam'd on that cross; and pattern fails me now.
Have rent the easing.  Many a time ere now
Examining, had led me, that we now
Amid the vernal sweets alighting now,
Finding no food on earth.  This well I know,
He parted thence: and if the world did know
The widow for her son: now doth he know
The ark from town to town; now doth he know
Much in a narrow space.  All there shall know
Of the celestial movers; or to know,
Our mind can satisfy her thirst to know:
Will not conceal me long, but thou wilt know
My wish may have completion I must know,
But is done zealously and well?  Deem now,
Devoutly sighs, for virtue even now
O'erflourish'd.  Such the sires of those, who now,
Reveal'd, whose genial influence makes now
The rest was whiter than the driven snow.
With angels laden.  But to mount it now
In mortal eagles," it began, "must now
Which oft might have perplex'd thee still.  But now
Will own it equaling the rest.  But now,
Theirs and not thine shall be the crimson'd brow
And saw her, where aloof she sat, her brow
Inweaves the coronet, so every brow
To turn the poop, where she hath now the prow;
The matter and the substance of the vow,
     "This would'st thou know, if failure of the vow
With their great bridegroom, who accepts each vow,
From step to step alight, and wheel, and wax,
Are in your talents various.  Were the wax
Nature, that is the seal to mortal wax,
And that, which first had come, began to wax
Of primal splendour doth its faint reflex.
Equivocating, darken and perplex.
Included, as the quatre in the six.
The world's enlightener vanishes, and day
Spins ever on its axle night and day,
The flight of innocent wings:  but since the day
That winter's month were but a single day,
Was shed thence.  As the rooks, at dawn of day
Between the last night and the primal day,
In good deeds doth perceive from day to day
And in his father's sight:  from day to day,
Unless thou be eked out from day to day,
As if in dull inaction torpid lay.
By civil business wealth; one moiling lay
And here the wisdom, which did open lay
Thyself a costly jewel, dost inlay!
Silent and moveless.  "This is he, who lay
To dally with itself in idle play."
Could not through all the universe display
Out of his own sufficiency to pay
As under snow the ground, if the warm ray
She, of the time prevenient, on the spray,
Of Paradise; and one in that array,
Shot from a bow three-corded.  And as ray
Our Sirens with their tuneful pipes, as ray
All after ill example gone astray.
Permits not from its beams their feet to stray."
     Short space ensued; I was not held, I say,
Which bringeth thee so near: and wherefore, say,
"I not a whit misdoubt of its assay."
The choicest of thy love for God.  But say,
But now 't is made, taking the bread away
Such as from memory glide and fall away.
Drove from before mine eyes the motes away,
Each cloud of his mortality away;
Leads, for his saintly flock, along the way,
The forward path again; so as the way
And I will therefore show thee why such way
But for the virtue, whose o'erruling sway
Can please them.  Thenceforth goes he on his way,
Is plain, thou sayst:  but wherefore God this way
Of my proud keel, that singing cuts its way,
And I am fain to pass unconstrued by.
For these are a partition wall, whereby
Makes thee fall back in unsound vacancy.
With sounds that lull'd the parent's infancy:
Been manifested, by transparency
Surpassing far its utmost potency.
Gather'd along the cross a melody,
     Such close was to the circling melody:
Then, trilling out his last sweet melody,
In song of most unearthly melody.
Was mighty on their lips; nor needed they,
She looks on pious pray'rs: then fasten'd they
Whom I have sung preluding, borrow'd they
To do thee gentle service.  We are they,
By stream of potent radiance: therefore they
Inspir'st, mak'st glorious and long-liv'd, as they
That writes but to cancel, think, that they,
When such life may attend the first.  Yet they
The spindle and the flax; O happy they!
One moment seems a longer lethargy,
Each the known track of sage philosophy
Had with another sun bedeck'd the sky.
Then saw I sprinkled over all the sky.
On all sides wasteth, suddenly the sky,
The wain, that, in the bosom of our sky,
Counsel of other, wise, benign and friendly:
His bounty shall be spread abroad so widely,
Make the first circle beauteous, diversely
Then saw I of an eagle, lively
And from the seventh step, successively,
Which I had found there, first shone glisteningly,
Hide and reveal the strand unceasingly;
Bears rule in earth, and its frail family
Between two kinds of food, both equally
In wond'rous sort despis'd.  But royally
Rang through the spheres; and "Holy, holy, holy,"
Were in Acone's parish; nor had haply
Even, hath pleas'd me:  "thus the prompt reply
'How then had he no peer?'  thou might'st reply.
By other works well done may so supply
Affection bends the judgment to her ply.
The scripture, condescending graciously
E'en thus their carols weaving variously,
Their separate distinctions variously
With Beatrice, I thus gloriously
Was she, but smil'd thereat so joyously,
As Beatrice will'd, explicitly.
This doth assure me, lady, rev'rently
Beheld our image painted: steadfastly
Where Hector lies; then ill for Ptolemy
Will he the worthless and vile company,
Today's is made tomorrow's destiny.
Of credulous fools beneath.  Saint Anthony
That now is laden with new felony,
Desired Spirit!  with its harmony
Suited in strict and wondrous harmony."
From thence, as to the ear sweet harmony
In size and splendour, through augmented joy;
I have the power to gaze: and hence the joy,
From its original nature full of joy,
And in her eyes such fullness was of joy,
Such mere effulgence in her eyes, such joy,
Love of true happiness replete with joy,
You raise me.  Through so many streams with joy
Admitted to his order dwell in joy.
From all parts answ'ring, rang: that holier joy
Thy Son shalt follow, and diviner joy
Unto the steadfast dwelling of their joy.
Made me to rate the riches of their joy.
Took in the full dimensions of that joy.
May know, when to new thoughts I chang'd, what joy
That, sparkling in thine eyes, denotes thy joy,
Thou utter'st, both in weight and in alloy.
When in the flecker'd dawning he shall spy
The circles, to the furthest, till thou spy
The coin of Venice.  O blest Hungary!
Did she renounce.  This is the luminary
Throughout the livelong day.  The common cry,
Or act, what next behoov'd;  and did descry
With her sweet brood, impatient to descry
Distinctly scann'd.  Nor might I not descry
And at Trespiano, ye should have your bound'ry,
That were the grave of Peter's soldiery,
Is void), the same hath made my cemetery
A sudden lightening and new revelry.
l am exalted to this height of glory,
Power, but to leave one sparkle of thy glory,
But what thou sayst hath to my memory
Into heav'n's counsels deem that they can pry:
But, ere the Gascon practice on great Harry,
Clearliest, the nature and the ministry
'O ye!  whose intellectual ministry
There shall be seen the Spaniard's luxury,
     Here vigour fail'd the tow'ring fantasy:
Nor hath ink written, nor in fantasy
And comprehends not.  Me such ecstasy
And what I saw was equal ecstasy;
And, dashing 'gainst the stocks of heresy,
Either that God had of his courtesy
With soul prophetic.  The bright courtesy
They live, yet never know satiety,
Amid th' accordant sons of Deity,
Were, "Best he thou, Triunal Deity!
And bar'd the truth of poor mortality;
Such faithful and such fair equality,
Below, what passeth her ability,
He needs must forfeit his nobility,
O slight respect of man's nobility!
And Francis his in meek humility.
Florence in such assur'd tranquility,
And in his will is our tranquillity;
Of each thing new: by such conformity
Where well they thrive, not sworn with vanity.
'That well they thrive not sworn with vanity."'
Your hearts, and bend your gaze on vanity,
Detection must lay bare its vanity
That is each round shows more divinity,
Inhabiting his own eternity,
E'en as all numbers ray from unity;
     "If thou, like me, beheldst the charity
And eyes glist'ning with smiles:  "Our charity,
And its grain safely stor'd, sweet charity
Confederate to make fast our clarity.
If not from side to side this rarity
Of scripture hold supreme authority.
     "Through human wisdom, and th' authority
Is forc'd to yield to man's authority,
Held in suspense, since of necessity
Yet not of choice but through necessity
But hence deriveth not necessity,
That yet no glimmer of its majesty
