A Cincinnatus or Cornelia now.
A Salterello and Cianghella we
Abandoned himself.  Therefore 't is good
Abates in him the keenness of desire,
Abateth most his speed; that, seeing her
A blast, that scours the sky, forthwith our air,
A body, in whose virtue dies the being
Above the vulgar, grateful I refer;
Above th' horizon, where the sun declines;
Absolute will agrees not to the wrong,
Acceptable to God: and, for its sake,
Accordant walk: Whom God will not endure
Accordant with the rest my lady sang.
According to his kind, hath better fruit,
According to the virtue it conceives,
Accounting less the pleasure of those eyes,
A common sewer of puddle and of blood:
A constellation off and more, had ta'en
Acquires more pleasure; so, the whilst it spake,
A dame to whom none openeth pleasure's gate
A day new-ris'n, as he, who hath the power,
Admittance to the barn.  I question not
Admitted to his order dwell in joy.
Admonish'd, I the question urg'd no more;
Adoring; for the charity of him,
Adown the breathing tresses of the flow'r
A faithful witness.  Thou shall leave each thing
A falcon flying.  Last, along the cross,
Affection bends the judgment to her ply.
Affection fails me to requite thy grace
Affection found no room for other wish.
Affection sound, and human passions quell.
Affection springs in well-disposed breast;
Afflation of eternal bliss pervades them.
     After mine eyes had with meek reverence
After solution of my doubt, thy Charles,
"After that Constantine the eagle turn'd
After the milk is taken; so outstretch'd
     After the precious and bright beaming stones,
After with Titus it was sent to wreak
Again his scatter'd people.  In that clime,
Again mine eyes were fix'd on Beatrice,
Against God's pleasure, than that fruit which makes
Against its keenness.  The least star we view
Against the motions of the heav'n, that roll'd
Against the noontide heat.  And as the chime
Against the universal ensign rears
"Against the virtue, that o'erpow'reth thee,
Ages long past or new, on one sole mark
A hundred little spheres, that fairer grew
A hundred years twice told and more, his seat
A ladder, which my ken pursued in vain,
A lake so broad.  The newness of the sound,
A lamping, as of quick and vollied lightning,
Alas for you!--And lo!  toward me, next,
A law immutable hath establish'd all;
Albeit one, who borders them With gold,
A light of so clear amplitude emerg'd,
A light to stand, that on the three shall shine,
Alike distributed, or more, or less.
A little ruby, whereon so intense
A little stuff may furnish out their cloaks.
A little while returning to the flesh,
All Paradise survey'd:  when round I turn'd
All after ill example gone astray.
All apprehension, me it well would please,
All, as I name them, down from deaf to leaf,
All, as they circle in their orders, look
All beauteous things eternal.  What distils
All envying in its bounty, in itself
All gracious aid befriend us; for that I
"All grappling bonds, that knit the heart to God,
All heav'n is mov'd, himself unmov'd the while.
All he hath seen forgets; yet still retains
All in like manner change with me.  My place
All intellectual creatures, and them sole
All mov'd around.  Except the soul divine,
All others by my song.  Down through the world
All power well nigh extinct: or, from direct
All rest; the flamy circle at that voice
All sinister aim.  Illuminato here,
All stretch'd to speak, from whence I straight conceiv'd
All the first region overpast I saw,
All their dispraise is written, spread to view?
     All there, who reign in safety and in bliss,
All the world pays for, and in that, which pierc'd
All they, who look'd to Christ already come.
All things, that appertain t' ye, like yourselves,
All those, who in that time were there from Mars
All times are present, I, the whilst I scal'd
All ye, who in small bark have following sail'd,
Almost to level on our earth declines;
Aloft, and downward with such sway prevail,
Along the spires, where each hour sooner comes;
Along this ladder, down whose hallow'd steps
Already Caponsacco had descended
Already of myself aloft I look'd;
Already on my temples beam'd the crown,
Already stretched under our feet there lies:
Alter not, when through pious prayer below
     Although divested of my first-rais'd doubt,
A lustre over that already there,
Amazement waited me; for in her eyes
Am her own faithful Bernard."  Like a wight,
Amid th' accordant sons of Deity,
Amid the vernal sweets alighting now,
Among her sons, not one more full of hope,
Among his tuneful brethren.  'Let all hope
Amongst them down, to his own person joining
Among the first of those barefooted meek ones,
And Agostino join me:  two they were,
And Ardinghi, and Bostichi.  At the poop,
     And Beatrice:  "The first diving soul,
And Beatrice after him her words
And Beatrice next:  "Say on; and trust
And Beatrice, that a little space
And, "Did I smile," quoth she, "thou wouldst be straight
And I am fain to pass unconstrued by.
And I began: "O fruit!  that wast alone
And I did bear impression of this heav'n,
And I, had there our birth-place, where the last
And Importuni: well for its repose
And Infangato were good citizens.
And I reply: I in one God believe,
And I speak of him, as the labourer,
And I, to own myself convinc'd and free
And I was with him, weetless of ascent,
And I will therefore show thee why such way
And Macra's, that divides with passage brief
And Mercury, and Mars.  That other doubt,
And Modena's was mourn'd.  Hence weepeth still
And Nicosia's, grudging at their beast,
And Norcera with Gualdo, in its rear
And Norway, there shall be expos'd with him
And Quintius nam'd of his neglected locks,
And Urban, they, whose doom was not without
And, "Whither is she vanish'd?"  straight I ask'd.
And after bear the rose upon its top;
And after them, who in the van appear'd,
And after through this heav'n from light to light,
And a less wonder, then the refluent sea,
And all his inclinations and his acts,
And, all that he hath heard revolving, saith
And am Justinian; destin'd by the will
And as a sleep is broken and dispers'd
And, as it ended, all the other lights
And, as one handling skillfully the harp,
And as our Lady on her glorious stool,
And as some cliff, that from the bottom eyes
And as the arrow, ere the cord is still,
And, as the bright dimensions of the star
And as the glow burns ruddiest o'er the wave,
And as the soul, that dwells within your dust,
And, as the words were ending, from above,
And as they flitted down into the flower,
And as th' unblemish'd dame, who in herself
And at Trespiano, ye should have your bound'ry,
And bar'd the truth of poor mortality;
And bark, that all the way across the sea
And bent on Beatrice all its gaze.
And better to denote his littleness,
And blessed makes this realm, which thou dost mount,
And, by that influence only, so prevail'd
And carol, smil'd the Lovely One of heav'n,
And celebrate his glory, whom they love,
And clearer far, thy brother hath set forth
And cold, that cover'd it before, so thee,
And comprehends not.  Me such ecstasy
And, dashing 'gainst the stocks of heresy,
And deeply, that beginning, which he needs,
And diving back, a living topaz each,
And draws the spirit most unto itself,
And drives away the nurse.  Nor may it be,
And enter'd its precinct.  O glorious stars!
And enters on the mazes of the dance,
And entertain them subtly.  Every orb
And every line and texture of the nest
And every sparkle shivering to new blaze,
And exile came it here.  Lo!  further on,
And eyes glist'ning with smiles:  "Our charity,
And faith to her:  and, from her bosom, will'd
And fatten'd, not with all their help to boot,
And fertile, which that cloister once was us'd
And fix its faith, unless the instance brought
And follow both the bridegroom; so the bride
And for a proof th' effect may well suffice.
And forc'd a passage out: whereat I mark'd
And for his justice, every method else
And for the peer Orlando, two my gaze
And for this reason he had vainly tried
And Francis his in meek humility.
And, from another, one reflected seem'd,
And from heav'n's queen, whom fervent I adore,
And from his heirs to issue.  And that such
And from my bosom had not yet upsteam'd
And from the lesser orb the goodliest light,
And from the martyrdom came to this peace."
And from the see (whose bounty to the just
And from the seventh step, successively,
And from the wilds was dragg'd to martyrdom,
And from within it these the sounds I heard.
And gaze thy fill.  But since thou hast on earth
And girt the star, and hov'ring round it wheel'd.
And give it inward keeping.  Knowledge comes
And gladly will I loose the knot, wherein
And goodness, virtue owe and grace.  Of slave,
And great as ancient, of Sannella him,
And had'st good cause; for had my sojourning
And having told the errand keeps his peace;
And heav'n was open'd, though the earth did quake.
And hence the beam, that from without proceeds,
     "And hence thou mayst by inference conclude
And hence thy surname grew.  I follow'd then
And he of Spain in his twelve volumes shining,
And he offendeth not in word or deed.
And here I glitter, for that by its light
And here my brethren, who their steps refrain'd
And here the lilies, by whose odour known
And here the wisdom, which did open lay
And he, who had to her descended, once,
And his beneficence:  for he shall cause
And hitherward the shore, where thou, Europa!
And holds them still enraptur'd with the view.
And, if I am a timid friend to truth,
And if her nature well thou contemplate.
And if our fantasy fail of such height,
And, if thou mark and listen to them well,
And if thou note the point, whence each proceeds,
And if thy mind observe me well, this form,
And inasmuch as we must needs infer
And, in believing, nourish'd such a flame
And in each gesture grace and honour high.
And in each one was heard:  "Lo!  one arriv'd
And in her eyes such fullness was of joy,
And, in himself, all, who since him have liv'd,
And in his father's sight:  from day to day,
And in his will is our tranquillity;
And in like guise was Adam's spirit mov'd
And in such space as on the notch a dart
And interchang'd their plumes.  Silence ensued,
And in that midst their sportive pennons wav'd
And in that space so variously hath wrought,
And in the likeness of a river saw
And, in the saintly eyes what love was seen,
And in the song it mingled.  And the dame
And in the spleen unfolded what it sought.
And invocation, but like honours paid
And in your tetchy wantonness as blind,
And it is nature which from height to height
And it is soon extinct; thus from the horn,
And its grain safely stor'd, sweet charity
And know'st not thou, whatever is in heav'n,
And know, that by intenser love its course
And leaf unwith'ring, blessed spirits abide,
And leaves a blank: for that our mortal speech,
And let not with his Guelphs the new-crown'd Charles
And let them wince who have their withers wrung.
And like to babe, that stretches forth its arms
And lively hope with violence assail
     And lo!  forthwith there rose up round about
And love of singularity prevail.
And make me such a vessel of thy worth,
And mantling crimson, in two listed rays
And mark'd, how near him with their circle, round
And, marking clearly, that I told thee, 'Risen,'
And master to me:  Albert of Cologne
     "And may that be, if different estates
And meanwhile rest assur'd, that sight in thee
And men may mingle for thee when they hear."
And merely in respect to his prime gift,
And murmuring cooes his fondness; thus saw I
And needy is gone by, not through its fault,
And none left desolate a-bed for France!
And note thou of this just and pious realm
And not through its deserving.  As thou heard'st,
And not to perish, ere these hundred years
     And now the visage of that saintly light
And of its opposite.  He next, who follows
And of my bliss in Paradise.  Forthwith
And of our well-beloved.  And let this
And of the fluent phrasemen make your king;
And of the light that vests me, I thus far
And of the spirit humbly sued alone
And of whose envying so much woe hath sprung,
And on Pharsalia with so fierce a plunge,
And one the voice, that issued from them all.
And one to witless indolence resign'd;
And on the coast secur'd it of the right.
And on the summit of the M. I saw
And open proofs of this unto the world
And other comes instead.  Upon the mount
And other great festivity, of song,
And other most selected parts of Rome,
And part upon their left; nor that the keys,
And pass their own inventions off instead.
(And pray they be not scant) that thou wouldst drive
And prove thou to me, that my inmost thoughts
And providence have wrought thus quaintly.  Here
And put a period to your gladsome days,
And put power into them to bend his will.
And radiance, light with light accordant, each
And reap'd Ausonian lands.  On the hard rock,
And reason in some sort discerns the same,
And rode triumphant through the civil broil.
And said:  "Already satisfied, I rest
And saw her, where aloof she sat, her brow
And say, who level'd at this scope thy bow."
And scatter'd my collected mind abroad.
And seems some star that shifted place in heav'n,
And shall for ever hold them to their place,
And she hath power to reach it; else desire
And she, so distant, as appear'd, look'd down,
And she was like the mother, who her son
And, shrouded so in splendour answer'd me,
And smil'd; then tow'rds th' eternal fountain turn'd.
And so at giddy distance mocks thy view.
And so beseemeth: for, in mortals, use
And so beseems:  for that he bare the palm
And speaks not, till the master have propos'd
And straightway as the handmaid of the sun
And strives with searching ken, how he may see
And such a speeding grace shone over me,
And such eclipse in heav'n methinks was seen,
And such profession:  "As good Christian ought,
And suddenly upon the day appear'd
And sweet regard gave birth to holy thoughts,
And thanks for that return'd; e'en so did I
And that as far in blessedness exceeding,
And that great light, inflam'd me with desire,
And that 't is lain upon a mortal shoulder,
And that, which all the faithful hope, as I do,
And that which can die, are but each the beam
And that, which first had come, began to wax
And that, which, in their circles, none who spies,
And the blind bull falls with a steeper plunge,
And thence transmitting downwards.  Mark me well,
And thence with lustre, more or less, it shows
And then concluded:  "For this cause behooves,
And therefore dost not ask me who I am,
And therefore give no thanks, but in the heart,
And therefore let the example serve, though weak,
And the rejoicing spirits, like to spheres
And there on mine: where every aim is found
And the upstartled wight loathes that be sees;
And the world's leaders, in the blessed beak
And they may well consist with that which thou
And they together cluster'd into one,
And they who gaze, presageful call to mind
And they who on their stools beneath her sit,
And this condition, which appears so low,
And this place hath authority enough
And this the cheerful semblance, I behold
And thou might'st after of Piccarda learn
And thou shalt bear this written in thy soul
And thou shalt see what vehement desire
And thou the cause of it hast likewise ask'd.
And through the living light so lustrous glow'd
And thus did these, whom they had power to seek
And thus it answer'd:  "A short date below
And thus it spake:  "One ear o' th' harvest thresh'd,
And thus reflected come to thee from all.
And thus the saintly orison began.
     And thus the senior, holy and rever'd:
And thus to me Beatrice:  "Thank, oh thank,
And thy great grandsire.  Well befits, his long
And 't is moreover most expressly mark'd
And to his enemies terrible.  So replete
And toil'd me with the change.  In that abyss
And to mine eyes so sudden was the change,
And to the Holy Spirit," rang aloud
And, to the mortal world when thou return'st,
And to the primal love our ken shall rise;
And to the shepherd cleave; but these so few,
And trades and traffics, had been turn'd adrift
And truly need there is, that he forecast,
And turneth to resolve him, if the glass
And 'tween the summit and the base did move
And us their centre: yet more sweet in voice,
And veil'd in dense impenetrable blaze.
And violent; so look'd Beatrice then.
And visited the nether world of woe,
And wafted on into the swiftest heav'n.
And was appointed to perform thereafter,
And was this semblance thine?"  So gaz'd I then
And wearied he, who ounce by ounce would weight it,
And were the world below content to mark
And what I deem is truth how just revenge
And what I saw was equal ecstasy;
And what the language, which I spake and fram'd
And wheel around their airy lodge; so seem'd
And whence they hither came, more honourable
And whence thou hadst it?"  Thus proceeding still,
And, when desires thus err in their intention,
And when that Worthy thus, from branch to branch,
And, when the Lombard tooth, with fangs impure,
And when the words were ended, not unlike
And where Cagnano meets with Sile, one
And whiteness had o'erspread that hemisphere,
And who art thou, that on the stool wouldst sit
And with complacency so absolute
And with glad triumph deck th' ethereal cope.
And with how vehement desire it asks
And with lean abstinence, through many a year,
And with mine eyes my soul, that in her looks
And, with no artful colouring on her cheeks,
And without boasting, so God give him grace."
And with such figuring of Paradise
And with that family, whom now the cord
And with thin ranks, after its banner mov'd
And wond'rous note attested new delight.
And work on the foundation nature lays,
And worse: and, at your birth, ye, mortal men,
And wouldst, that I should bolt my words afresh
And yet contain'd within it.  The other orbs
Angelical, disporting in their sphere.
Angelical, while yet in flesh it dwelt.
Another, Xerxes; and Melchisidec
Another brine, his offering to the priest,
Another could endure, which needs must be
Another, how the light shrouded itself
Another mystery.  Tell him, if the light,
Another of those splendent forms approach'd,
Another question thwarts thee, which to solve
Another, with her maidens, drawing off
Answer'd the carols all.  Amidst them next,
Anticipative of the feast to come;
Apollo guides me, and another Nine
Appearance, still new miracles descry'd,
Appointed, such as in these wheels is seen.
Approach'd the topmost bough, he straight resum'd;
Approval met, that from their inmost fount
Approva1 of my wish.  "And O," I cried,
Apt utterance for my thoughts!" then added:  "Sire!
Ardour into my breast, unfelt before.
Are aim'd at by this bow; hut even those,
Are all combin'd in thee.  Here kneeleth one,
Are as it were two roots unto this rose.
Are blessed, even as their sight descends
Are but a preface, shadowy of the truth
Are by created virtue' inform'd: create
Are centered; in this palace is the weal,
Are chief of all the greatest.  This, that shines
A reckoning of that just one, who return'd
Are cover'd with one skin.  O patience!  thou
Are crude; but on thy part is the defect,
Are different in their shares of excellence.
Are happy, long ye for a higher place
Are in gradation throned on the rose.
Are in your talents various.  Were the wax
Are liveliest, which resemble him the most.
Are met with but in babes, each taking leave
Are mortal: but mortality in some
Are nearly one to Begga and my land,
Are one.  So that as we from step to step
Are order'd, looking for a sign: whence she,
Are plac'd throughout this kingdom, pleases all,
Are present.  Not for increase to himself
Are princedoms and archangels, with glad round
Are rare.  With this distinction take my words;
Are ready at thy pleasure, well dispos'd
Are seraphim and cherubim.  Thus swift
Are short.  But what thy own thought is, declare."
Are shut and rais'd together), from the heart
Are that they purport?  None hath sworn so to thee."
Are therefore wand'rers.  Yet before the date,
Are the sole study.  Pope and Cardinals,
Are those, which make thee beat thy wings below
Are thrones; in whom the first trine ends.  And all
Are wafted through Perugia's eastern gate:
"Arise and conquer," as to one who hears
Arisen, now in round, now lengthen'd troop,
Arose and set, when I did first inhale
Around, and shroud me, as an animal
Array them in their flight, greeting, as seems,
Arriv'd, where wond'rous thing engag'd my sight.
Arriveth, must be ripen'd in our beam."
Art, as the noon-day torch: and art, beneath,
Art, but destruction; and this may not chance,
As Beatrice will'd, explicitly.
     As Daniel, when the haughty king he freed
As Glaucus, when he tasted of the herb,
As I toward the water, bending me,
As Jesus stood before thee, well can'st speak them."
As Jove might be, if he and Mars were birds,
As apprehending, hasteneth on to reach
As, at the birth of morn, the eastern clime
As by the fifth or half ye count forth ten.
As candle in his socket.  Then within
Ascending or descending here below,
As centre in the round.  That which dies not,
As clock, that calleth up the spouse of God
As each is wider from the centre.  Hence,
As earthly thought determines two obtuse
A second crown, to deck their Guardian's virtues,
A second, there is none, to his enclos'd
     As embers, at the breathing of the wind,
As ever mark to arrow's point oppos'd.
As eye doth in the sea; which though it mark
As fancy doth present them.  Be thy power
As far as human reason sees, are good,
As fervent; fervent, as in vision blest;
As for the leaves, that in the garden bloom,
As from a cloud the fire is seen to fall,
As from self-question to assure the soul."
As from the first a second beam is wont
     As here we sometimes in the looks may see
As high he, disobeying, thought to soar:
As if in dull inaction torpid lay.
As if 't admire its brave appareling
     As in a quiet and clear lake the fish,
A single beam, its origin must own
As in that image many were the loves,
     As in the calm full moon, when Trivia smiles,
As iron that comes boiling from the fire.
A sister, with like violence were torn
As is the bantling, that of hunger dies,
As is the colouring in fancy's loom,
As is the sky that sways him.  That he speaks,
As is through glass the hue that mantles it,
As it comprises more of goodness in 't.
As it hath grave beyond its virtue great.
(As its remoter circle girds the world)
As joy through pupil of the living eye.
     As leads the galaxy from pole to pole,
As makes all likeness scant.  But will and means,
As mallet by the workman's hand, must needs
As man prevails o'er man; but conquers it,
As might have made one blest amid the flames,
As mine was at those words: and so entire
As more in number distant from the first,
As mountain rock, the whilst he hears me speak),
As nature doth in fire, tho' violence
As nearest stars around the fixed pole,
As never eye created saw its rising,
As none may see and fail to' enjoy.  Raise, then,
As note is to its metre; even thus,
As not to let the tongues e'en of his foes
As not to make the' offence excusable.
As now to thee, hath twice the heav'nly gate
     As oft along the still and pure serene,
As one by over-eagerness perplex'd:
As one in slumber held.  Not long that mood
As one, who fain would speak yet holds his peace,
As one, who fearful of o'er-much presuming,
As one, who from a dream awaken'd, straight,
As one, who in perplexity desires
As one who joys in kindness:  "In that part
As one who knows the name of thing by rote,
As one who reckons on the blades in field,
As one, who till arriv'd, weets not his coming.
As on her frenzied child a mother casts;
     As on her nest the stork, that turns about
As only care to have their coffers fill'd."
A space so ample, yet in brightness thou
A sparkle is distinct, or voice in voice
A splendour gliding; nor, the word was said,
As rainbow is from rainbow: and the third
Assail it, but those talons hold in dread,
As see not the First cause entire: and ye,
As sight can bear thee.  Yet, alas!  in sooth
Assign'd me.  There, whence at thy lady's hest
As star by side of star.  And so far off,
As strickly as thou may) save one of these,
Assum'd the teacher's part, and mild began:
Assur'd me; and mine eyes I lifted up
Assur'd, they turn'd again unto the light
As surely as your church is vacant, flock
As that its bed is dark, the shape returns
As the great sign, that marshaleth the world
As the great spirit of Aquinum ceas'd;
As their eternal phases each impels.
As their just heritage, he gave in charge
As the mind saddens, murkier grows the shade.
As there are splendours, that it shines on: each
(As the sun changes quarter), to the sixth.
As this doth clasp the others; and to Him,
As thou beholdest now, from step to step,
As thou hast noted, still doth kindle more,
As thou in every contradiction seest
     As through translucent and smooth glass, or wave
As thy own laurel claims of me belov'd.
As till our number equal the decree
As to myself, who own it, when thou lookst
A stony ridge ariseth, in such sort,
As to outstrip feet younger than thine own,
As to the good, whose plenitude of bliss
Astounded, to the guardian of my steps
As 't were, away; and yet the sense of sweet,
As 't were the shadow; for things there as much
A sudden interruption to his road.
A sudden lightening and new revelry.
As under snow the ground, if the warm ray
As unto gods!" --"How in the light supreme
A sun upon the world, as duly this
As upon certain stair it met, and clash'd
As was behooveful for such questioner,
As was my ken from hers; and yet the form
     As when, for ease of labour, or to shun
     As when, if Juno bid her handmaid forth,
     As when the lightning, in a sudden spleen
     As when the ring-dove by his mate alights,
     As when the sturdy north blows from his cheek
As who should say, "My errand was for this."
At Argo's shadow darkening on his flood.
At each new minist'ring.  Then silence brake,
At Europe's extreme point, the bird of Jove
At eve or morning, paints and adverse cloud,
At her aspect, such inwardly became
A thing incredible I tell, tho' true:
A thing to marvel at, in splendour glowing,
A third; and he a fourth, whose airy voyage
A third time thus it spake; then added:  "There
At my baptismal font, shall claim the wreath
At my right side, burning with all the light
At nightfall, glides a sudden trail of fire,
At sound of the Pompeian trump, return'd.
Attend, and yield me all thy heart."  He said,
Attendant on some skilful songster's voice
Attest; as thou by diligent search shalt find
At the first table.  Modern Shepherd's need
At the repeated name of Joshua,
     At the sweet sounds of comfort straight I turn'd;
At thy last peace, the victim, Florence!  fell.
Attracting with involuntary heed
Attributes, nor so means: and holy church
At what of them I tell thee, whose renown
At which the dart of my intention aims.
Augustas hail'd, to Italy must come,
Augustin, Francis, Benedict, and the rest,
A unit for his virtue, for his vices
Avails not to resist.  Here is the might,
"Ave, Maria, Gratia Plena," sang:
"Ave Maria" singing, and with that song
A wreath reflecting of eternal beams.
Ay or the purse, is gentle as a lamb,
Backward return with speed, and your own shores
Back with redoubled ardour were mine eyes
Bandied about more frequent, than the names
Barefoot and lean, eating their bread, as chanc'd,
Bare me into the ray authentical
Bari, and Croton, and Gaeta pil'd,
Bark'd off in hell, and by Perugia's sons
Bars not the door, no more than she above,
Bat painted on her cheek; and her fix'd gaze
Beam'd on that cross; and pattern fails me now.
Beaming upon me, thus her words began:
Beams, in this hour, commingled with his might,
Beams in your countenance, wond'rous fair,
Bearing its seal immutably impress'd.
Bears goodly blossoms; but its ruddy promise
Bears rule in earth, and its frail family
Beating thy pennons, thinking to advance,
Beatrice, I descried her not, although
Beatrice in oblivion.  Naught displeas'd
Beatrice led me; and, "Behold," she said,
Beatrice look'd with eyes that shot forth sparks
Beatrice spake:  "O life in glory shrin'd!"
Beatrice stood unmov'd; and I with ken
Beatrice suffer'd:  she, with such a smile,
     Beatrice upward gaz'd, and I on her,
Became a queen; and this for him did Romeo,
Because, if what were told me, had been true
Because I tell them, but discern'st not how;
Because 't is willing to be conquer'd, still,
Be chang'd; for, while I speak, these shalt thou see
Becoming of these signs, a little while
Been e'er unclos'd?" so spake the light; whence I
Been longer on the earth, the love I bare thee
Been manifested, by transparency
Been mere and unconditional release.
Been perfect, such as once upon the bars
Befalls me to portray, voice hath not utter'd,
Before baptizing.  O how far remov'd,
Before her day be ripe.  But ye are sick,
Before me either court of heav'n displac'd.
Before me sat they down, so burning bright,
     Before mine eyes stood the four torches lit;
Before my sight appear'd, with open wings,
Before my view the saintly multitude,
Before the Spiritual court, by nuptial bonds,
Before the sun, when the consummate flower
Before you in the wave, that on both sides
Began:  "The love, that makes me beautiful,
Began; and thus, as one who breaks not off
Began to wheel, nor yet had once revolv'd,
Beginning:  "For that I was just and piteous,
    "Beginning from that hour, when Pallas died
Beginning, to what point thy soul aspires:
Begirt thee.  Thou dost deem thy thoughts to me
Be granted, that first motion is; or if
Beguil'd the credulous nations; but, in terms
Beheld her charms, up to that view of them,
Beheld our image painted: steadfastly
Beheld the wondrous fruit, that was from him
Behind thee now conceal'd.  The Good, that guides
Behold her on the throne, wherein her merit
Behold how vast!  and these our seats so throng'd
Beholding pale and breathless, with her voice
Beholds our queen, and so enamour'd glows
"Behooves thee sift more narrowly thy terms,
Behooves thee to express, what thou believ'st,
Be idle in its praise.  Look thou to him
Believ'd in him, who had the means to help,
Believing it to have been taken thence,
Belov'd most dearly:  this is the first shaft
Below, like fire unmoving on the earth."
Below, what passeth her ability,
Beneath another standard: ill is this
Beneath its guidance, in their prime of days
Beneath the rays of Christ?  Here is the rose,
     Benign Apollo!  this last labour aid,
Be noted steadfastly: for of the fires,
Bent back her steps, and shadow'd o'er the sun
Bent on the point, at which my vision fail'd:
Be palpable, and proof apparent urge."
Be shorten'd with the time.  No mortal tongue
Beside me sparkles, as the sun-beam doth
Beside the Adriatic, in the house
Beside the gospel, other spear or shield,
Bespake me: "Gratefully direct thy mind
Be steadfast, is not hid from thee: for thou
Bestirring them to dry their feathers chill,
Bestow'd me, call'd on with loud cries; and there
Be taken:  for their deeds were to one end.
Be this reported; that none henceforth dare
"Be to mine eyes the remedy or late
Better discern, than thou whatever thing
Between Rialto, and the fountain-springs
Between discordant shores, against the sun
Between the last night and the primal day,
Between the man and fountain, amorous flame.
     "Between Tupino, and the wave, that falls
Between two kinds of food, both equally
Betwixt Pelorus and Pachynian heights,
Betwixt the former pair, shall meet thine eyes;
Betwixt the heav'n and earth."  Like to the fire,
Be vigilant and clear.  And, to this end,
Bewilder'd in deep maze.  The way I pass
Be ye not heedless of his urgent will;
Beyond her proper self; and, till I speak,
Beyond our mortal wont, I fix'd mine eyes
Beyond the mark of mortals.  When the flight
Beyond time's limit or what bound soe'er
Beyond whose chiding, after weary course,
Be yours, ye Ghibellines, to veil your arts
Bids the chords vibrate, and therein the song
Bituminous upsteam'd), THAT too did look
Blackness the other part; when to the left
Blest spirit!  quickly be my will perform'd;
Blest there.  The limbs, whence it was driven, lie
Blindly to execute a rash resolve,
Boldness to fix so earnestly my ken
Bonaventura's life in me behold,
Both from experience of this pleasant life,
Both heav'n and earth copartners in its toil,
Both innocent and guilty, did but reach
Both less and greater in that mirror look,
Both morn and eve, my soul, with all her might
Both one and other: and thou thence admir'st
Both openly, and in secret, in such wise
     "Both scriptures, new and ancient," I reply'd;
Both this and much beside of these our orbs,
Both to the 'yea' and to the 'nay' thou seest not.
Both verb and noun all blazon'd; and the extreme
Both who pretend its power and who oppose.
Both wise and simple, even all, who hear
Bound up and stifled, nor breathes freely forth.
Brancheth the circle, where the planets roll
Breathe now; and let the hunger be appeas'd,
Breathe up in warbled melodies threefold
Brooded the deep serene.  "Father rever'd:
     "Brother!"  he thus rejoin'd, "in the last sphere
     "Brother!  no eye of man not perfected,
     "But all the mighty standard yet had wrought,
But answer found from other than I ween'd;
But, as a mother, gracious to her son;
     But as it chances, if one sort of food
But at fair aim and glad.  Yet is it true,
But at his own discretion none may shift
But brief contingencies:  for so I name
But elsewhere now l bid thee turn thy view;
But, ere the Gascon practice on great Harry,
But first behooves thee of this water drink,
But flow'd to me the first from him, who sang
     "But forasmuch as holy church, herein
But for the purchase of this happy life
But for the real manna, soon he grew
But for the virtue, whose o'erruling sway
     "But (for the vision hasteneth so an end)
     "But (for we far have wander'd) let us seek
But, 'gainst an erring and degenerate world,
But gave them truth to build on; and the sound
But have through others' merit been advanc'd,
But hence deriveth not necessity,
But he, who is aware those living seals
But he, who search'd our volume, leaf by leaf,
But he, who thinks how ponderous the theme,
But hidden through its deepness.  Light is none,
But his who fills it basely), he besought,
But hunger of new viands tempts his flock,
But in itself intelligibly plain,
But in the sensible world such diff'rence is,
But is as level with the destin'd aim,
But is a stranger to its properties,
But is done zealously and well?  Deem now,
But it is part of our delight, to measure
But light transparent--did I summon up
But marvel too?  'Twixt gladness and amaze,
But may some influence of your sacred dews
But nature renders it imperfect ever,
But now 't is made, taking the bread away
But of his light the beam, must needs attract
But only my transgressing of the mark
But she as light'ning beam'd upon my looks:
But since hath disaccustom'd I began;
But since the deed is ever priz'd the more,
But soon as in this heav'n his doubting eyes
But speak thou with them; listen, and believe,
But such my lot by charity assign'd,
But tell, I pray thee, whence the gloomy spots
But tell me, if thou hast it in thy purse."
But that its tendency doth prompt perforce
But that my vision quickening, in that sole
But, that the love, which keeps me wakeful ever,
But that what I disclose to thee is true,
But, that what now appears not, may appear
But the high providence, which did defend
But then the citizen's blood, that now is mix'd
But this is not.  Therefore remains to see
But this our life the' eternal good inspires
But through itself alone was driven forth
But to no lofty eminence, a hill,
But to receive the grace, which heav'n vouchsafes,
But unbaptiz'd he dies, and void of faith.
But unto such, as turn and show the tooth,
But what thou sayst hath to my memory
But whoso takes his cross, and follows Christ
But ye perversely to religion strain
But yet the will roll'd onward, like a wheel
By Adice and Tagliamento, still
     "By Beatrice summon'd," he replied,
By Danube wash'd, whenas he strays beyond
By being thence refracted farther back.
By blessed movers be inspir'd.  This heaven,
By both his ways, I mean, or one alone.
By civil business wealth; one moiling lay
By doing worse or, not unlike to him
By either key, the yellow and the white.
By force or sophistry aspir'd to rule;
By him of Pressa:  Galigaio show'd
By him, that runs her annual game.  Thus much
By his self-humbling, to his brotherhood,
By inspiration of God's grace impell'd,
By interchange of splendour.  I remain'd,
By its own virtue rear'd then stands aloof;
By it the pride of Arab hordes was quell'd,
By other service may be so supplied,
By other's stairs, But that shall gall thee most
By other works well done may so supply
By proof of right, and of the false reproof;
By stream of potent radiance: therefore they
By supplication mov'd and holy love)
By their well-fitted guerdon.  Of the five,
By the keen lance, both after and before
By the mere act of his eternal love.
By the which thou didst on the billows walk.
By those brief words, accompanied with smiles,
By thought on thought arising sore perplex'd,
By true repenting slack'd the pace of death:
By turns some star is to our vision lost.
By using well thou think'st to consecrate,
By vicious fondness.  Thou no more admire
By whom that holiest banner is withstood,
By whose pure laws upon your nether earth
CANTO I
CANTO II
CANTO III
CANTO IV
CANTO IX
CANTO V
CANTO VI
CANTO VII
CANTO VIII
CANTO X
CANTO XI
CANTO XII
CANTO XIII
CANTO XIV
CANTO XIX
CANTO XV
CANTO XVI
CANTO XVII
CANTO XVIII
CANTO XX
CANTO XXI
CANTO XXII
CANTO XXIII
CANTO XXIV
CANTO XXIX
CANTO XXV
CANTO XXVI
CANTO XXVII
CANTO XXVIII
CANTO XXX
CANTO XXXI
CANTO XXXII
CANTO XXXIII
Caesar or bard (more shame for human wills
Calabria's abbot, Joachim , endow'd
Came back unto his bones.  Of lively hope
Came through that medium down, unmix'd and pure,
Can miss of, in itself apparent, struck
Cannot to thee be dark.  Why then delays
Can please them.  Thenceforth goes he on his way,
Can roam, hath in such order all dispos'd,
Can travel inward.  I, meanwhile, who drew
Canvas the' angelic nature, and dispute
Care not for this, the crowd that now are girt
Cast, from above, upon the flower, or view
Cause thee to marvel, in that thou behold'st
     "Cause too thou findst for doubt, in that it seems,
Celestial, marking me no more intent
Checkers the shadow, interpos'd by art
Chiusi and Sinigaglia; and 't will seem
Choose which thou wilt, nor even Mary's self,
Christ and his followers; but found the race
Christian at once and Cacciaguida; as were
Christians like these the Ethiop shall condemn:
Christ said not to his first conventicle,
Christ's nature merely human, with such faith
Chrysostom, and Anselmo, and, who deign'd
Circling in fashion of a diadem,
Circumference so ample, that its bow,
Cities and realms by thee!  thou with thyself
Clear and unmov'd, and flowing not so deep
Clear'd of the rack, that hung on it before,
Clearliest, the nature and the ministry
Collected, on the goodliest ardour fix'd.
Comes to the eye: such saw I many a face,
Come to the foot, and crown myself with leaves;
Commended, while they leave its course untrod."
Committed glory, e'en into his hands,
Compar'd unto the sounding of that lyre,
Complete.  My tongue shall utter now, no more
Compounded, to corruption turn, and soon
Compounded, yet one individual light
Concentrate, and God's will and ours are one."
Conception birth!  Yet this to what I saw
Conducted by the lofty seraphim.
Confederate to make fast our clarity.
Confusion to your elements ensued.
Consenting with its course, when he of yore,
Consents to that which forceth, not for this
Consider how the human flesh was fram'd,
Consisteth; one is that, whereof 't is made,
Consult your teacher, and he tells you 'no."'
Contemplate here the wonder I unfold.
Contemplating, I fail to pierce the cause."
Contented.  But the blessed Agapete,
Contented; vanquishing me with a beam
"Contingency, unfolded not to view
Contrive, and will ere long effectuate, there,
Converse with me: my will thou seest; and I,
Corporeal, doth proportion its extent
Cost him his son.  In her circuitous course,
Could be with justice punish'd:  from which doubt
Could but the vulgar catch a glimpse the while
Could not through all the universe display
Could store, shall now be matter of my song.
Counsel of other, wise, benign and friendly:
Count it not hard henceforth, when thou dost hear
Counts not the act, oh then how great must needs
Cours'd up and down along the living light,
Course, and in happiest constellation set
Courteous will give; nor will the gift ill suit
Cover'd of Libra and the fleecy star,
Coveted sight, more fondly, for myself,
Created beings all in lowliness
Created, even in the mother's womb,
Created first was blameless, pure and good;
Created his due station knew: those highest,
Created in his joyous sight to dwell,
Created, that in seeing him alone
Cried Beatrice, "the triumphal hosts
Current opinion leads to false: and then
Dealt by th' eternal hand, that tends them all."
Deceived and ill dispos'd: and I it was,
Declar'd to me our justice on the earth
Declare thee, What is faith?"  Whereat I rais'd
Deeper into the truth, wherein rest is
Degenerates most, been stepdame unto Caesar,
Delusion opposite to that, which rais'd
Demands entire my thought.  Join'd with the part,
Demands my further parle.  Inquire thou wouldst,
Depart from Florence.  This they wish, and this
Deprav'd) joy to the Delphic god must spring
Derision, haply thus he hath disguis'd
Derivable by no created good,
Descended with such speed, it had not seem'd
Descending, ev'ry light in heav'n, methought,
     "Descending hence unto the lowest powers,
Descending other lights, that rested there,
Descend these hallow'd steps: not that more love
Describ'd on Jerome's pages thou hast seen.
Deserts, and has a byway of his own:
Desired Spirit!  with its harmony
Desire, ne'er since extinct in me, to hear
Desire of their dead bodies; yet perchance
Despoils himself forever of that love.
Detain'd me; and these words it spake:  "'T were well,
Detection must lay bare its vanity
Devoutly as I may, I pray thee hold
Devoutly sighs, for virtue even now
Did Beatrice's silence hold.  A smile
     "Did I advance no further than this point,
Did Rome consign it; and what then it wrought
Did Sextus, Pius, and Callixtus bleed,
Did bare his feet, and, in pursuit of peace
Did carry.  Then the season come, that he,
Did compass in the other's beam; and both
Did, from th' eternal Sovran, beam entire
Did gird on me; in such good part he took
Did gore the bosom of the holy church,
Did leave the keys, which of this wondrous bliss
Did lighten on me, that whatever bait
Did look for, on whose tables I inscrib'd them.
Did make provision, thorough grace alone,
Did move away, and mix; and with the choir
Did rest them, and were mute.  O nymph divine
Did set them, like to rubies chas'd in gold;
Did she renounce.  This is the luminary
Different virtue compact different
Different virtues needs must be the fruits
Differing in love and sweet affection.
Digested fitly to nutrition turn.
Diligite Justitiam, the first,
Diminish'd fades, intensest in the midst;
Direct his footsteps to so dread a bourn.
Discern'd, accruing to this upper world
Discern'd, when one its even tenour keeps,
Discerns it not; and ne'ertheless it is,
Discerns, on which this proof is built.  Such truth
Discourse, continued in her saintly strain.
Dismantled in thy mind, I will inform
Dispensing, seems to contradict the truth
Display'd in this brief song.  The characters,
Dispos'd to render up itself to God,
Dispose, for their own seed and produce apt.
Dissentient, one refus'd his sacred read.
Dissolve.  Yet these were also things create,
Distends, and he has won the meed he sought:
Distinct, and quaint adornment. At their glee
Distinctly, are below from mortal eye
Distinctly scann'd.  Nor might I not descry
Distinguish'd into greater lights and less,
Divided thought and images remote
Divin'd; and with such gladness, that God's love
Do leave the knot untied: so hard 't is grown
Dost see contingencies, ere in themselves
Doth burn and quiver, held so far retir'd
Doth, by the rolling of her heav'nly sphere,
Doth come across him, and he strives in vain
Doth ever watch it.  See, how thence oblique
Doth from the vision, that reflects the scene.
Doth glitter in me.''  As the master hears,
Doth more and better execution,
Doth own from him the virtue, fashions it.
Doth represent with human countenance
Doth the sweet symphony of Paradise
Doth, through his bounty, congregate itself,
Doth well her art, but no distinctions owns
Down in Cieldauro, and from martyrdom
Down to its foot, one luminary ran
Down to the Sabines' wrong to Lucrece' woe,
Down unto Mary, when the Son of God
Dream, though their eyes be open; reckless some
Dropp'd from its foil; and through the beamy list
Drops satiate with the sweetness; such appear'd
Drove from before mine eyes the motes away,
Due from the pole, round which the first wheel rolls,
Due to the poet's temples: for I there
Dwelt I upon the shore, 'twixt Ebro's stream
Each circuiting, more beautiful.  Round this
Each cloud of his mortality away;
Each evil in the scale, whate'er of light
Each leaf in full maturity, are set
Each one, who bears the sightly quarterings
Each part of other fitly drawn and urg'd,
Each soul restor'd to its particular star,
Each sure of burial in her native land,
Each the known track of sage philosophy
Each to the' intelligence that ruleth it,
Eager to listen, on the advent'rous track
Ebullient shot forth scintillating fires:
E'en as Alcmaeon, at his father's suit
E'en as all numbers ray from unity;
E'en as a pilgrim bent on his return,
     "E'en as his beam illumes me, so I look
E'en as our King, who in us plants his will;
E'en as set down by the unerring style
E'en as the bird, who midst the leafy bower
(E'en as the eyes by quick volition mov'd,
E'en as the tenour of my song declares.
E'en as the truth that man at first believes.
E'en at the moment of its issuing; thus
E'en at the outset of thy heralding,
E'en in that region of unwarp'd desire,
E'en in the haven's mouth seeing one steal,
E'en so between two deer a dog would stand,
E'en so remembrance of that witching smile
E'en so would stand a lamb between the maw
E'en such am I: for all the vision dies,
E'en such was I; nor unobserv'd was such
E'en the warm Nile was conscious to the pang;
E'en thou wentst forth in poverty and hunger
E'en thus, O Jesus, my true Lord and God?
E'en thus their carols weaving variously,
E'en thus th' external answered.  When the footing,
E'en to the loveliest of the glittering throng.
E'en to the palm, and issuing from the field,
E'en what his words declare: or else to shun
E'en what remembrance keeps, than could the babe's
E'en when she to the world again was brought
Egidius bares him next, and next Sylvester,
Either before or after the blest limbs
Either for him who gave or who receiv'd
Either that God had of his courtesy
Elsewhere are fix'd, him worthiest call and best.
El was the name on earth of the Chief Good,
Embellish'd, as the sun the morning star;
Enamour thee, as that thou dost not turn
Ended within me. Beck'ning smil'd the sage,
Endurance should he shorten'd by thy deeds.
Engendereth loving; for that lively light,
Engenders and expands the cursed flower,
Engirt by that it girdeth.  Wherefore love,
Enjoy it.  At this point o'erpower'd I fail,
Enlighten'd, beyond which no truth may roam,
Enlighteneth all our tribe: and ere his term
Enliven'd by that warmth, whose kindly force
Ennobler of thy nature, so advanc'd
Enough of that, which the world cannot see,
Enring'd each other; till the seventh reach'd
Enter into my bosom, and there breathe
Enwheeling, sweep their ampler circuit wide.
Equal returns.  Those, glorious, who pass'd o'er
Equivocating, darken and perplex.
Ere I descended into hell's abyss,
Ere I had spoken, smiling, an assent,
Ere cheeks with down are sprinkled; he, that fasts,
Erect for speech.  But soon a sight appear'd,
Ere for themselves they had the power to choose.
Ere it was done:  then, at the naming saw
Ere one had reckon'd twenty, e'en so soon
Ere the creating of another world,
Ere the crude aliment, which thou hast taken,
Ere they were made imperishable flame.
Erewhile had hail'd me.  Forthwith brighter far
Erewhile irradiate only with his beam,
Erewhile perverted well nigh all the world;
Erewhile, with lilied crowning, well content
Erroneous so must prove what seem'd to thee.
Escap'd; and, in her vesture mantling me,
Escorted, thus preventing me, rejoin'd:
Essence threefold and one, mysterious league
Eternal Love unfolded.  Nor before,
Eternal: from his voice I learn, whose word
Eternally, as now: and, if it doth,
Even, hath pleas'd me:  "thus the prompt reply
     "Even so glittering and so round," said I,
Even to wonder, did not the safe word
Exactly, as the finger to the ring.
Exalted; so that in their will confirm'd
"Exalted worth and perfectness of life
Examining, had led me, that we now
Excell'd in lustre all the front oppos'd.
Excelling, saw I issue forth a flame
Excess of light, however pure.  I look'd;
Excluded, chalice no entrance here may find,
Excuse me that, whereof in my excuse
Exhaustless riches and unmeasur'd bliss.
Existent, looking at the point whereto
Expansive, so that from its womb enlarg'd,
Expatiates without bound.  Therefore, if aught
Expect completion of thy lofty aim,
Expected long, shall crown at last the bloom!"
Expects the sun; nor ever, till the dawn,
Experience, if thereof thou trial make,
Experience inequality like this,
Extended to their utmost of this rose,
Eyeing the light, on more than million thrones,
Faces had they of flame, and wings of gold;
Fade, and the spangled firmament shuts in,
Faded my brow, be destin'd to prevail
Fail not, or who, first faulty made them fail.
Fair governance was yet an art well priz'd
Faith of things hop'd is substance, and the proof
Falls in appearance dwindled and obscur'd,
Fast-knit to Christ; and the first love he show'd,
Fattens with this his swine, and others worse
Favour with thee."  So I my suit preferr'd:
Fearless, and frank and jocund, utter forth
Fearless of bruising from the nightly ram,
Feed now: the matter I indite, henceforth
Felices ignes horum malahoth!"
Few now are wanting here!  In that proud stall,
Fifth of the saintly splendours?  now he knows
Finding discordant fortune, like all seed
Finding no food on earth.  This well I know,
Finds not; e'en such was I, intent to scan
Firm, and susceptible of all delight."
Firmly upon me, manifested forth
First enter'd on the faith which maketh souls
First, in Christ's triumph, of all souls redeem'd:
     "First refuge thou must find, first place of rest,
First, singing, to their notes they mov'd, then one
Five hundred fifty times and thrice, its beams
Five times absolve their round.  Consider thou,
Fix'd on the suitor, witness'd, how benign
Fix'd upon her, from upward gaze remov'd
     "Fix now thine eye, intently as thou canst,
Flash'd up effulgence, as they glided on
Flew downward to the mighty flow'r, or rose
Florence in such assur'd tranquility,
Florence was by the bullets of bright gold
     "Florence, within her ancient limit-mark,
Fly without wings.  Nor only him who asks,
Follow'd of him, who severs it and justice:
Follow'd yet other two.  And every one,
Followed from either choir, as plainly spoke
Following gently the impress of the bird.
Follow their hoops, in likeness to the point,
     For Beatrice, she who passeth on
For, Beatrice, when I thought to see,
For Charles and Frederick living: now he knows
For I have mark'd it, where all time and place
For all mine eyes have seen, I, to thy power
For all our good is in that primal good
For all the good, that will may covet, there
For all ungrateful, impious all and mad,
For, as the sun doth to the feeblest sight,
For confessor," said I, "vouchsafe to me
Forecasts, this garden equally to fill.
Forerun the asking.  Whatsoe'er may be
Forerun the asking.  With him shalt thou see
Foretaste of that, which from your table falls,
For every mind.  Thus happiness hath root
For fear the age and dowry should exceed
For he among the fools is down full low,
For heretic declension.  To the end
For highest merit were an ample meed.
For his own folly by himself aton'd.
For, in her splendour only, shalt thou win
For, in that upper clime, effulgence comes
For in the compact between God and him,
For in thy womb rekindling shone the love
For I therein, methought, in its own hue
For its own flame the torch this fitting ever!
For light celestial, and abortive fell.
For light'ning scap'd from its own proper place
For ministries so high: therefore their views
For, mounting these eternal palace-stairs,
For my deliverance apt, hast left untried.
For my remaining enterprise Do thou
For naught, that man inclines to, ere was lasting,
For not in process of before or aft
For one of these may rise, the other fall."
For our redemption chose, eludes my search.
For praying, in accordance thus were mute?
For souls belov'd of God. Isaias saith,
For space is none to bound, nor pole divides,
For statues one, and one for aphorisms
For that she favour'd first the high exploit
For that, so near approaching its desire
For that they are so equal in the sun,
For that thy views not yet aspire so high."
For that, which hither from the mortal world
For their excuse, they do not see their harm?
For there on each desire completion waits,
For these are a partition wall, whereby
For they of weighty matter shall possess thee.
Forth from his limbs unsheath'd.  O power divine!
Forth from the havens stretch'd unto the hills.
"Forth from the last corporeal are we come
For this it was enjoin'd the Israelites,
For this there only have been shown to thee,
Forth of the beamy flame which dazzled me,
Forth on his great apostleship he far'd,
For those whom grace hath better proof in store
For thou, who figur'st them in shapes, as clear,
For thou wilt see the point from whence they split,
Forth snatch'd me from the pleasant cloister's pale.
For thy paternal greeting.  This howe'er
For tidings from the dumb.  When, singing thus,
For to that honour thou, and my high theme
For very eagerness towards the breast,
For virtue, yet more high to lift his ken
For visual strength, refining more and more,
For want of tenting."  Thus she said:  "But take,"
For well behoov'd, that, in some part of heav'n,
For we, who see our Maker, know not yet
For what so precious in the balance weighs,
For wisdom, to the end he might be king
For wisest, who esteems it least: whose thoughts
For worship set apart and holy rites."
Foul usury doth not more lift itself
Found all contentment.  Yet no smile she wore
Found of recovery (search all methods out
Four circles with the threefold cross, in best
Fourth family of the Omnipotent Sire,
Four thousand and three hundred rounds and twice,
Freely the sage, though wrapt in musings high,
Freely to speak my thought: above myself
Free wholly, uncontrollable by power
From Acquasparta nor Casale, whence
From Bagnororegio, one, who in discharge
From Campi and Certaldo and Fighine,
From Egypt to Jerusalem, to see.
From Ganges doth:  therefore let none, who speak
From Paradise, because it had eschew'd
From Valdigrieve past the Buondelmonte.
     "From Valdipado came to me my spouse,
From Var unto the Rhine, saw Isere's flood,
From admiration deep, but now admire
From all parts answ'ring, rang: that holier joy
From an eye-witness to heav'n's mysteries."
From Athens, by his cruel stepdame's wiles,
From bad to worse it shifted.--Cephas came;
From blest Ubaldo's chosen hill, there hangs
From centre to the circle, and so back
From circle to the centre, water moves
From everlasting, irremovable.
From former knowledge quite transmuting you.
From forth the fountain of all truth; and such
From good intent producing evil fruit:
From hence, had seem'd a moon, set by its side,
From hence is distant; and the shadowy cone
From hence proceeds, that which from light to light
From her celestial eyes.  "Wonder not thou,"
From her fair countenance my gladden'd soul
From him, nor from his love triune with them,
From him transmitted, who is first of all,
From his well doing, doth not helm him aught,
From holy spirits, winging that profound;
From human to divine had past, from time
From ire, that spurr'd him on to deeds unjust
From its original impulse warp'd, to earth,
From its original nature full of joy,
From its reach sever'd them: whereat the guide
From marking them, or ere her words began,
From mid the cluster shone there; yet no gem
From non-compliance, it agrees.  Of will
From organ comes, so comes before mine eye
From pasture, fed with wind: and what avails
From range to range, fanning their plumy loins,
From rock to rock transpicuous, making known
From step to step alight, and wheel, and wax,
From such belief our reasoning, all respect
From that below.  But fully to content
From that blest ardour, soon as it was stay'd:
From that soft winnowing.  Shadow none, the vast
     From that, which I did note in beauty most
From that within (in manner of that voice
From the Cirrhaean city answer kind.
From the Pierian foliage, when one breast
From the deep spirit, that moves its circling sphere,
From thee alike, and more remote the third.
From thee, the next, distilling from his spring,
From the fair Cyprian deity, who rolls
From the fair nest of Leda rapt me forth,
From the first hour, to that which cometh next
From thence, as to the ear sweet harmony
From the oak's birth, unto the acorn's setting.
From the redundant petals, streaming back
From the world's lowest gap unto this height.
From this perplexity will free thee soon
From vain excess to clear th' encumber'd laws.
From whence erewhile a firebrand did descend,
From whence my voice thou hear'st; more thanks to her.
From whence ye drew your radiance and your heat,
From where the Trento disembogues his waves,
From which the twice twelve cions gird thee round.
From whose fair height my lady's eyes did lift me,
From winter's calendar, these heav'nly spheres
Full-blossom'd in my bosom, as a rose
Full more than thousand splendours towards us,
Gabriel, and Michael, and him who made
'Gainst Brennus and th' Epirot prince, and hosts
Gather'd along the cross a melody,
Gazing, as never eagle fix'd his ken.
Genius, art, practice--I might not so speak,
Genoan bounds from Tuscan.  East and west
Gentiles but Christians, in firm rooted faith,
Giouchi, Sifanti, Galli and Barucci,
Girt humbly: nor did abjectness of heart
Given now such aid, that to retrace your forms
Give rise to talk of Cain in fabling quaint?"
Gives birth to flowers and fruits of holiness.
Giving himself to make man capable
Gladdening the thronged spirits.  Each did seem
Glides freely, and no obstacle prevents.
Glitters; and, With his beauties all unveil'd,
Glow'd Belus' daughter, injuring alike
Glow'd in his eye, and o'er his cheek diffus'd,
Glows vigorous yet within me, and inspires
Gluts every food alike in every moon.
God and our nature join'd!  There will be seen
Goddess!  "I straight reply'd, "whose lively words
God knows how after that my life was fram'd.
"God of Sabaoth!  that does prank them thus!"
     "God seeth all:  and in him is thy sight,"
God therefore and the Jews one sentence pleased:
Goes round thee with his shears.  Resuming then
'Go forth and preach impostures to the world,'
Good heed, if that, which I have told, recall
Good, inasmuch as we perceive the good,
Goodliest of all, is by such love inspired,
Goodness celestial, whose broad signature
Grace and good-will their measure have assign'd.
Grant virtue now to utter what I kenn'd,
Grav'd in that streaky fire.  Who painteth there,
Greater to more, and smaller unto less,
Great flame hath risen: after me perchance
Grew brighter at her smiles; and, if the star
Grow not of different duties in your life?
Had God to Ema giv'n thee, the first time
     Had I a tongue in eloquence as rich,
Had I but witness'd order, in the world
Had, as I mounted, with my pennon vied.
Had but my brother's foresight kenn'd as much,
Had div'd unto the bottom of my grace
Had drawn the veil from off our pleasant life,
Had held as strange a marvel, as ye would
Had it still lack'd of newer neighbourhood.
Had left.  That other joyance meanwhile wax'd
Had made the leash to take me.  As I turn'd;
Had not a flash darted athwart my mind,
Had not so much suspended me with wonder,
Had not the people, which of all the world
Had of fair truth unveil'd the sweet aspect,
Had op'd lips; so well their answer pleas'd.
Had pointed his demand; yea noted well
Had put forth more than blossoms.  The left bank,
Had rais'd for utterance, straight the holy mill
Had settled in his place, the head and neck
Had shown the web, which I had streteh'd for him
Had stream'd unto me: therefore were mine eyes
Had with another sun bedeck'd the sky.
' Hail Virgin!' to the throes, by which my mother,
Hangs over it with never-sated gaze,
Hardanapalus, to exhibit feats
Has cost; what favour for himself he wins,
Has, in her nest, sat darkling through the night,
Has peopled this fair realm with citizens,
Has spread to utmost amplitude.  Of thee
Has to the skies return'd.  How wide the leaves
Hast there thy ken, where all things are beheld
Hath circuited the mountain, was my son
Hath colours fine enough to trace such folds.
Hath dispossess my spirit of itself.
Hath each his several degree assign'd.
Hath ever travel'd?  Such are they dwell here,
Hath from itself, the chief Good, ne'er been mov'd.
Hath none to guide him; of himself he guides;
Hath on the mantle of thick vapours prey'd;
Hath plac'd her."  Answering not, mine eyes I rais'd,
Hath potency, the like to that which dwelt
Hath power, directed thus, to bend elsewhere;
Hath risen,' which no small distinction needs.
Hath satiated, and of another still
Hath the church militant: so 't is of him
Hath two ordain'd, who should on either hand
Hath undone!  and in all her goodly deeds
Have I learnt that, which if I tell again,
Have I my memory left, e'en by the bad
Have I with song applausive ever ceas'd
Have bastardized.  And they, of Portugal
Have been afforded in Parmenides,
Have been her brightness!  What she was i' th' sun
Have by his virtue been infus'd, who form'd
Have from the sea of ill love sav'd my bark,
Have held unceasingly their view, intent
Have made it worthy reverence.  Not unknown
Have made necessity; or whether that
Have mov'd me to the blazon of a peer
Have not in any other heav'n their seats,
Have order; and from hence the form, which makes
Have peace; and in a circle spreads so far,
Have rais'd assurance in me, wakening it
Have rent the easing.  Many a time ere now
Have told him true, and sees the record faithful
Heard vain disputers, reasoners in the schools,
     "Hear now and wonder at what next I tell.
"Heav'n, and all nature, hangs upon that point.
Heav'n's anger less, than when the book of God
He bare below!  tent this man, as thou wilt,
He came, who was the Holy Spirit's vessel,
He comes, and to the worldly wax best gives
He dates from Mars his lineage.  Were it not
He first through pride supplanted, who was sum
He for ill pleasure pay with equal pain.
     He forthwith answ'ring, thus his words began:
He had been warier that the greedy want
He had, through thirst of martyrdom, stood up
He hasted (not to intermit his toil),
He hath defin'd it, substance, and then proof."
He hath endow'd.  Hence now thou mayst infer
He hath in sooth good cause for endless grief,
Held Laurence firm, or wrought in Scaevola
Held in suspense, since of necessity
Held, near the mountains, whence he issued first.
Held on them fix'd her looks: e'en as the spouse
Helm'd to right point; and such our Patriarch was.
He makes the victim, and of his own act.
He may put forth his hand 'gainst such, as drive
He might be construed, as indeed he was,
Henceforth be led unto thy feet, to make
He, nearest on my right hand, brother was,
He needs must forfeit his nobility,
He parted thence: and if the world did know
Her bidding, and encounter once again
     Here are the treasures tasted, that with tears
Here break we off, as the good workman doth,
Here eve was by almost such passage made;
Here is Macarius; Romoaldo here:
"Here is the goal, whence motion on his race
Here is the reas'ning, that convinceth me
Here memory mocks the toil of genius.  Christ
Here 'mid these other blessed also blest.
Here shalt thou look on either mighty host
     "Here, silent as thou art, I know thy doubt;
Here thou to us, of charity and love,
     Here vigour fail'd the tow'ring fantasy:
Here were they shown thee, not that fate assigns
     Her eyes fast fix'd on the eternal wheels,
Her grace, whose might can help thee. Thou in prayer
Her infinite sweetness.  Thence mine eyes regain'd
Her mother, and her son, him whom they feign'd
Her never dying fire.  My wishes here
Her silence and chang'd look did keep me dumb.
Her sway?  Into the yellow of the rose
Her virgin beauty, and hath since made mourn
Her words resum'd, in gesture and in voice
He sent, who by their deeds and words might join
He shall behold thee with such kind regard,
     He straight rejoin'd:  "Say, were it worse for man,
He tells it to you not in words, nor e'en
He to that heav'n, at which the shadow ends
He to the left, the parent, whose rash taste
He was made sharer in our gamesome mirth.
He was not yet much distant from his rising,
(He who endur'd the desert and the pains
He who usurps on earth (my place, ay, mine,
Hide and reveal the strand unceasingly;
Hides through excess of light, when his warm gaze
Himself, in his own work enclos'd to dwell!
     Him, who lives ever, and for ever reigns
Him, who was born to gird on him the sword,
Hippolytus departed, such must thou
His annual journey; and, through every light
His beauty and his eagerness bewraying.
His blame, if he believeth not?'--What then,
His body laid upon another bier.
His bounty shall be spread abroad so widely,
His convent Peter founded without gold
His dearest lady, and enjoin'd their love
His family, that wont to trace his path,
His father-in-law should yoke him to its tribe.
His glory, by whose might all things are mov'd,
His goodly spirit should move forth, returning
His hard intention he to Innocent
His help-mate.  Messenger he seem'd, and friend
His knighthood and his privilege retain'd;
His lady leave the glass.  The sons I saw
His mother; but no sooner hath free use
His offspring: whence, below, the human kind
His outside seeming to the cheer within:
His own deep calm should brood, to Caesar's hand
His pennons shook again; lightning thence fell
His progress in the zodiac underneath.
His soul with lively virtue, that when first
His stripling choice: and he did make her his,
His threefold operation, at one act
His title from the fam'd Bellincione ta'en.
His true opinion.  If his meaning be,
His uncle and his brother's filthy doings,
His virtue growing; I e'en thus perceiv'd
His words: and what he taught, now plainly see,
Hither through failure of their vow exil'd.
Holds now remembrance none of what she was.
Hold you in mock'ry.  Be not, as the lamb,
Home to the sheep-fold, destitute of milk.
"Hosanna Sanctus Deus Sabaoth
Hosannas blending ever, from the three
"Hosanna," to the fixed point, that holds,
Hover'd around; and, like a troop of bees,
Hover'd the brink of dread infinitude.
How I above those lighter bodies rise."
How bitter can spring up, when sweet is sown."
"How contrary desires each way constrain thee,
How dear he costeth not to follow Christ,
How dear thou holdst the virtue, these to him
Howe'er, if love itself dispose, and mark
How feeble and how faint art thou, to give
How hard the passage to descend and climb
How in thine intellect already shines
How lustrous was thy semblance in those sparkles,
How many are the fangs, with which this love
How mighty them I saw, whom since their pride
How numberless!  The city, where we dwell,
How plac'd: but the flight was not for my wing;
How salt the savour is of other's bread,
'How then had he no peer?'  thou might'st reply.
How they are gone, and after them how go
How through this passage to the truth I ford,
How to the circle fitted, and therein
How vain and inconclusive arguments
How well is lov'd in heav'n the righteous king,
How, when ye shall regain your visible forms,
Hugues of Saint Victor, Pietro Mangiadore,
Humbled himself to put on mortal flesh.
'I am as I was wont.'  Yet such were not
"I am not worthy, of my own desert,
     "I am thy root, O leaf!  whom to expect
I am, who thus with hov'ring flight enwheel
I and it sprang; my name on earth Cunizza:
I answer'd:  "Nature did not make for these
     I answered:  "Lady!  I with thoughts devout,
     I answ'ring, thus; "Thy gentle words and kind,
I at those accents saw the splendours down
I but of one will tell:  he tells of both,
I call created, as indeed they are
I can reflect on thee."  Thereat the light,
"I come to aid thy wish.  Looking aloft
I could not look upon them.  Smiling then,
I do accuse me, and may own my truth;
I do but speak of it, my soul dilates
I dwell, who recompenseth every wrong."
     I ended, and therewith a song most sweet
"If I have power to show one truth, soon that
If I may gain such favour, as to gaze
     If all, that hitherto is told of her,
If aught approach them from without, do draw
"If beyond earthly wont, the flame of love
If body enter body, how much more
If duly weigh'd, that argument is void,
I fear my life may perish among those,
If e'er the sacred poem that hath made
If, free of hind'rance, thou hadst fix'd thyself
If he in love, in hope, and in belief,
If he liv'd not in fellowship on earth?"
If in this wondrous and angelic temple,
If it were true, had through the sun's eclipse
     If I were only what thou didst create,
If necessary with contingent e'er
If not from side to side this rarity
If one with steady eye and perfect thought
If rare or dense of that were cause alone,
If rarity were of that dusk the cause,
     "If such one wheel of that two-yoked car,
If that do mean, as men interpret it.
If that, whereof thou hast oblation made,
     If the grim brood, from Arctic shores that roam'd,
If the last bond be not within the new
If th' intellectual powers, that move these stars,
If thou didst miss the sequel of my tale,
     "If thou, like me, beheldst the charity
If thou no longer patiently abid'st
If thou of all the rest wouldst be assur'd,
If thou to me of shine impart so much,
If thou wouldst tell me of thy name, and this
If thou yet other cords within thee feel'st
"If thus, whate'er by learning men attain,
If to excel be worthy man's endeavour,
If to this man through God's grace be vouchsaf'd
     "If violence be, when that which suffers, nought
If we should wish to be exalted more,
If with thy mountainous girdle thou wouldst arm thee
I gave me wholly, and consign'd mine arms
I had been lost; but, so embolden'd, on
I had not ended, when, like rapid mill,
I had not turn'd me to them; he may well
I have discover'd to thee, yet behooves
I have, no doubt, instill'd into thy mind,
I have the power to gaze: and hence the joy,
I leave in silence here:  nor through distrust
Ill knew to guide, and on each part the light
Ill shapes that man his course, who makes his wrong
Illume me, so that I o'ercome thy power
Imagine (and retain the image firm,
I may not say, so uniform was all,
Immediate, and enamours of itself;
Immediate rules, and Nature, awed, suspends
Immediate thence, no end of being knows,
Immortally above, he hath not seen
Impels it, inwardly, or from without.
Impenitent, tho' scourg'd.  The hour is near,
Imperishable life of peace and love,
Impression of his glory, that the Word
Impression of the feeling in his dream;
Imprints: and from this germ, this firstling spark,
Impurpled, well denoted our ascent.
In Ananias' hand.'' I answering thus:
In Borgo yet the Gualterotti dwelt,
In Christ accomplish'd, innocence herself
In Christ divides them.  On this part, where blooms
In Dionysius so intently wrought,
In Him, who is truth's mirror, and Himself
In a brief moment on some maiden's cheek,
In breathless awe, and hopes some time to tell
In brightness, and in semblance such became,
In bright pre-eminence so saw I there,
In chief escort her: one seraphic all
In circles each about the other wheels,
In circling motion. rapid more or less,
In circuit journey round the blessed wreath.
In clear refraction.  And that, which next
Included, as the quatre in the six.
In colour like to sun-illumin'd gold.
Incredible how fair; and, from the tide,
Incredible to those who witness them;
In crystal, glass, and amber, shines entire,
In deep discernment.  Lastly this, from whom
In depth of counsel by created ken
In different pow'rs resolves itself; e'en so
In early times with their own innocence
In earnest of that day, e'en now are heard
In earth: and shall be, with the rest, so long,
Ineffable, whence eye or mind
In equal balance poising either weight.
In equal scorn of labours and of gold.
In even balance from the zenith pois'd,
In even motion, by the Love impell'd,
I never shall account it marvelous,
In every water.  Either testament,
In faithful mirror the celestial Justice,
In falsehood thy belief o'erwhelm'd, if well
In fashion, as a snow-white rose, lay then
Infatuate, who from such a good estrange
In fervency; for wisdom upon earth,
Inflicted by the cross, if thou regard
In folly, that great leader of the Greeks:
Inform me; that I may set forth the shapes,
Infuse into me, mighty as it is,
In good deeds doth perceive from day to day
In greatness more than earthly; I, who then
Inhabiting his own eternity,
In heav'n excelling, as once here on earth
In heav'n itself, but make my vaunt in thee!
In heav'n, such as Ariadne made,
In heav'n-ward musings.  Rich were the returns
In heights empyreal, through Honorius' hand
In her third epicycle, shed on men
In his broad pathway, saw I him return,
In holy scripture, where the twins are said
In infinite excess.  In proof whereof,
In its disposing influence supreme,
In its own silk enswath'd.  Thou lov'dst me well,
 In judgment, further off from him by far,
In kindness, as loose appetite in wrong,
In leathern girdle and a clasp of bone;
In liveliest portraiture.  But since true faith
In love and in delight so absolute,
In many a passage of their sacred book
In me its lord expected, and that horn
In mortal eagles," it began, "must now
In mortal ears the mystery of heav'n."
In mortals, for the cause ye well discern,
In mystic union of the Three in One,
In number did outmillion the account
Innumerable lights wherein one shines.
In one triangle not contain'd, so clear
In order each, as they appear'd, I mark'd.
"I not a whit misdoubt of its assay."
In peerless beauty, 'mid th' eternal nympus,
In seeing, not in  loving, which of sight
In shepherd's clothing greedy wolves below
In silence waited not: for to my lips
In single breath your odours manifold!
In size and splendour, through augmented joy;
In song of most unearthly melody.
In sooth, much aim'd at, and but little kenn'd:
In sooth no will had I to utter aught,
In so sweet household, Mary at my birth
Inspir'st, mak'st glorious and long-liv'd, as they
In spite of her own will and better wont,
Instructed by my words, the dread abyss.
     "In such compos'd and seemly fellowship,
In such plain open phrase, as may be smooth
In such sort whirl around, that each should tend
In sudden distance from my sight were veil'd.
Intelligence and power, unsever'd bond.
Intent on her, that charm'd him, Bernard gaz'd
Intent on these, ne'er journey but in thought
Intent, re-ent'ring on the wheel she late
In terms more full,
Interposition of such numerous flight
In that I told thee, of beatitudes
In that perfection of the sight, which soon
In the bright garland, which, admiring, girds
In the circumference, for the over arch,
In the confusion of its persons, as
In thee,' so speak his anthem, 'who have known
In thee, that its great Maker did not scorn,
In the fifth radiance.  Open now thine eyes
"In the first circles, they, whom thou beheldst,
In the fond quest unconscious of her toil:
In the great Lombard's courtesy, who bears
In their opinion, when the key of sense
In their whole being.  But the elements,
In the most secret council, with his lords
In the other little light serenely smiles
In the proud Soldan's presence, and there preach'd
In the refining wave; and, as the eaves
In the round chalice, even as the blow
In these bright stars, that round them circling move
In these great bodies: nor th' all perfect Mind
In th' everlasting Justice as low down,
In thine epistle, fell on me the drops
In this eternal springtide blossom fair,
In this our blessed cloister, shine alone
In this their order, diversely, some more,
In those rich-laden coffers, which below
In thought) that he should fathom to its depth
In three eternal Persons I believe,
Into a waste so empty, that ere long
Into heav'n's counsels deem that they can pry:
Into her consistory, and at leisure
Into  its orb; but the new loveliness
Into my fancy, mine was form'd; and straight,
Into new natures, like unto himself,
Into the eternal light, and clearly mark
Into the heav'n, that is unbodied light,
Into the mart from Fesole:  and Giuda
Into the narrow circuit of your walls.
Into the second realm.  There I beheld
Into the seventh splendour are we wafted,
Into the source and limit of all good,
Into the wondrous flood; from which, as one
Into whose keeping Christ did give the keys
In turning to its whereabout, and thus
In twofold vesture; and their proper lands this delicious life.
Invites me; for lo!  there aloft, as much
Invites me with the other to like toil.
Inward so far, it makes meridian there,
Inweaves the coronet, so every brow
In which couldst thou have understood their prayers,
In which the substance, that hath greatest speed,
In which thy thoughts, or ere thou think'st, are shown.
In whom desire is waken'd, and the hope
In wond'rous sort despis'd.  But royally
In word and motion, bent from her to learn
In your first childhood?  Tell me of the fold,
In your old baptistery, I was made
I ofttimes wail my sins, and smite my breast,
I other luminaries saw, that cours'd
I pass'd, as I remember, till my view
I pray thee, living topaz!  that ingemm'st
Is Lucia, at whose hest thy lady sped,
Is Paradise, though with like gracious dew
Is aftergrowth.  And of the seeing such
Is all depictur'd in the' eternal sight;
Is as the leaf upon the bough; that goes,
Is, at the wind-hole, modulate and tun'd;
I saw Beatrice turn'd, and on the sun
I saw Bellincione Berti walk abroad
I saw instead a senior, at my side,
I saw the daughter of Latona shine
I saw the splendours in such multitude
Is born on Indus' banks, and none is there
Is built; and therefore substance it intends.
Is but o'erpowered a space, not wholly quench'd:
Is, by the dripping of perpetual rain,
Is caus'd, I deem, by bodies dense or rare."
Is darken'd.  And to dignity thus lost
Is dark to me.  I fain would know, if man
Is easier.  Yet inform me, ye, who here
I see, lest nature in her part should tire."
     "I see, thou sayst, the air, the fire I see,
Is forc'd to yield to man's authority,
Is for this cause assign'd us, that our vows
Is founded every virtue, came to thee."
Is from its top, whose fruit is ever fair
Is grappled to thy soul."  I did not miss,
Is grown so dainty, good beginnings last not
I shall forthwith return, and, standing up
I shape mine answer, which were ended here,
Is holy, and that nothing there is done
I should forecast, that driven from the place
I should unlock the waters.  "May the grace,
Is how to shine: e'en they, whose office is
Is in composure settled by the power
Is in that gladsome harbour, to our tribe
Is in the church's keeping, all pertains.
Is kindled, and the virtue that it sheds;
Is left a profitless stain upon the leaves;
Is less than little.  Oh eternal light!
Is liveliest, full of fond desire she turn'd.
Is loosen'd from this body, it may find
Is meritorious, even as the soul
Is nature's prompting: whether thus or thus,
Is no return; unless, where guilt makes void,
"Is of the joy to come a sure expectance,
I somewhat further to thy view unfold.
Is on the universe, of all its ways
I soon will free thee; so thou mark my words;
I spake erewhile so strictly of its force.
"I speak, nor what thou wouldst inquire demand;
Is plac'd, then loosen'd flies, I saw myself
Is plain, thou sayst:  but wherefore God this way
Is sacred to the lonely Eremite,
Is sometimes quitted by the creature, who
Is sovran."  Straight mine eyes I rais'd; and bright,
Issued a breath, that in attention mute
Issued in form of words, such as my heart
Is summ'd; and all, elsewhere defective found,
Is swifter than the Chiana.  There was sung
Is this:  and of Aquinum, Thomas I.
Is to this swiftness wing'd. "To whom I thus:
     I straight obey'd; and with mine eye return'd
Is truth, that of himself to Moses saith,
Is turn'd: and thither now, as to our seat
     I suffer'd it not long, and yet so long
Is veil'd by others' beams."  I said, and turn'd
Is void), the same hath made my cemetery
Is with so vehement affection urg'd,
Is with such thirst inspir'd.  From a small spark
Is, with the sight of all the good, that is,
Is wrapt in mist.  Look then if she may do,
Is yet again unfolded, putting forth
It answer'd:  "From the day, when it was said
It can be known but where day endless shines.
     It chanceth oft some animal bewrays,
It cometh to me rather, which is shed
It doth remember me, that I beheld
It dwelt in Alba, up to those fell lists
It falleth against nature to the ground;
It happen'd.  Silent was I, yet desire
I then was of the lambs, that Dominic
I therefore por'd upon the view.  As one
I' th' holy office long; but thrust him down
     I, though my doubting were as manifest,
I' th' universal order, great defect
     I thus inquiring; he forthwith replied:
     "It is no marvel, if thy fingers foil'd
It is not therefore without cause, that these,
It is the eternal light of Sigebert,
It is the mighty ocean, whither tends
It is to pass in silence than to tell.
It may be, and the sight be justly crav'd.
It may for other substance be exchang'd.
It may with many woefully disrelish;
It moved my smiles: and him in truth I hold
It ne'er can warp to any wrongfulness.
It ne'er is cancell'd if not kept: and hence
I to myself impute, by equal doubts
It once was, now is grown unsightly bramble."
It past all former wont.  And, as by sense
It prophesied.  When, at the sacred font,
It rests the foot, but, as it still is wont,
Its amorous dalliance with my lady's looks,
Its contrary no further lets it pass.
Itself unalterable and ever one.
Its energy so sinks, at last it makes
Its goodness multiplied throughout the stars;
It should be e'er imagin'd: yet believ'd
Its image mirror'd in the crystal flood,
Its image takes an impress as a seal:
Its inner hem and skirting over us,
Its native shores Antandros, and the streams
Its nimble fire."  Along the cross I saw,
Its pathway, which the wisest fail to spell;
Its powers of apprehension, memory, choice;
Its proper semblance; thus this circling sphere
Its shining. And one ling'ring near us, wax'd
Its state, and who in it were highest seated?"
Its temper and impression.  Morning there,
Its topmost round, when it appear'd to him
Its virtue to my vision knits, and thus
I turn'd, and downward bent confus'd my sight.
I turn'd, but ah!  how trembled in my thought,
I turn'd me, like the chill, who always runs
     I turn'd me to Beatrice; and she heard
It warbled, and did say:  "As are my notes
"It were enough; nor should I further seek,
It wheel'd its bands, then tow'rd Dyrrachium smote,
It would not lack supply of excellence.
It wrought, is now by Cassius and Brutus
I understood not, so profound he spake;
     I was as one, when a forgotten dream
I was a virgin sister in the earth;
I was constrain'd to wear the hat that still
     I was not ware that I was wafted up
I well remember, did befall to me,
I will content thee even to thy wish
'I will make all my good before thee pass.'
I will make answer even to the thought,
I wist not of the fisherman nor Paul."
I would not wait thy asking, wert thou known
I wound my way, appear'd before me all,
Jocund and blythe, had at their pleasure still'd
Jove's tempering 'twixt his sire and son; and hence
Joy past compare, gladness unutterable,
Joy, that transcends all sweetness of delight.
Judith, Rebecca, and the gleaner maid,
Justice consists in consonance with it,
Justly reveng'd.  But yet I see thy mind
Keener than e'er was felt, to know their cause.
Keep silence here, pervading with such sounds
Kindled afresh, with vigour to sustain
Kindled, thy ken a higher flight shall mount;
Kindles our love, and in degree the more,
     "Know thou, that, from the first, these substances,
Lab'ring with such deep counsel.  Wheeling round
Lady of Heav'n!  will hover; long as thou
Largely bestow'd, if any of them fail,
Lastly from thee I learn, who chief proclaim'st,
Lavinia's spouse, was leader of the flight,
Lays forth its gradual blooming, redolent
Lay sick in grievous error many an age;
Leads, for his saintly flock, along the way,
Leapeth unto its mark; so on we sped
Learn I from him, who shows me the first love
Learn too, that downward from the step, which cleaves
Leave I; for he may answer thee with ease,
Leaving the circuit of their joyous ring,
Led unto her: and from her radiant smiles,
Left by his reason free, and variable,
Legions of splendours, on whom burning rays
Let him, who would conceive what now I saw,
Let not Dame Birtha and Sir Martin thence
     "Let not the people be too swift to judge,
Let thine eye, waiting on the words I speak,
Let thy upsoaring vision range, at large,
Licence to fight, in favour of that seed,
     "Lift up thy head, and be thou strong in trust:
Light flowing, from whose amber-seeming waves
Light intellectual replete with love,
Lights, scintillating, as they met and pass'd.
Like Semele when into ashes turn'd:
Like adamant, which the sun's beam had smit
     Like as a virgin riseth up, and goes,
Like choicest ruby stricken by the sun,
Like flame in alabaster, glow'd its course.
Like the accordant twinkling of two eyes,
Like to a falcon issuing from the hood,
Like to a golden mirror in the sun;
Like torrent bursting from a lofty vein;
     Like to the bachelor, who arms himself,
Like to the scholar, practis'd in his task,
List'ning, till they have caught the strain anew:
Lit sudden ore he deem of its approach,
Liveliest and loftiest.  She my secret wish
Lo!  I have set before thee, for thyself
Lo!  Where, with Beatrice, many a saint
Lo!  from within the sky a cresset fell,
"Lo!  lo!  behold the peer of mickle might,
Long as it suited the unripen'd down
"Long as the joy of Paradise shall last,
Long in expectance, when I saw the heav'n
Long tract of ages by the angels past,
Look downward, and contemplate, what a world
Look elsewhere for the leaves.  O mortal lust!
Looking for intimation or by word
Looking into his first-born with the love,
Looking upon the beauteous eyes, whence love
Look then how lofty and how huge in breadth
Look therefore of the cross:  he, whom I name,
Lords it, and bears his head aloft, for whom
"Love for the virtue which attended me
Love no compulsion needs, but follows free
Love of true happiness replete with joy,
Lustrous and costly, great renown hath left,
Made beauteous by so many luminaries,
Made for the dwelling of the human kind
Made mere abortion: faith and innocence
Made me to rate the riches of their joy.
Made promise of the way her sect enjoins.
Mad'st thee a joyful burden: and yet more
Makes the Creator visible to all
Makes thee fall back in unsound vacancy.
Makes with the precious body it enlivens,
Make the first circle beauteous, diversely
Making the star seem silver streak'd with gold.
Mak'st dull, so that thou seest not the thing,
Malignant fell."  Such colour, as the sun,
     "Man in himself had ever lack'd the means
Many a time his nurse, at entering found
Many, who now are weeping, would rejoice,
Mature, when first engender'd!  Ancient father!
May at God's pleasure work amendment here."
May be contended fully, let thy voice,
May be in Spirit, or in angel, met:
May be remark'd of different aspects;
May fathom this decree.  It is a mark,
May know, when to new thoughts I chang'd, what joy
May pardon, if it tremble with the burden.
Mayst at the wedding sup,--shall rest the soul
May'st know to keep the shallows, safe, untold.
May to herself apply.  From her, like me
May to our knowledge add, but to the end,
May well be such, to that without offence
Measur'd itself by none, it doth divide
Measure the circle; and, though pondering long
     Me doubt possess'd, and "Speak," it whisper'd me,
Meek ancestress of him, who sang the songs
Meet is, that to exalt its glory more,
Melissus, Bryso, and the crowd beside,
     Me seem'd as if a cloud had cover'd us,
Methinks its essence,"--" Rightly hast thou deem'd,"
Met ill acceptance.  But the Provencals,
Midmost for pupil, was the same, who sang
Midway the twain compartments, none there are
Might grace her triumph with them.  On the horns
Might keep her footing towards her well-belov'd,
Might seem a rent cloud when it grates the thunder,
Might still find page with this inscription on't,
Might try thy patience without better aid.
Mighty in learning, and did set himself
Mind cannot follow it, nor words express
Mine eyes a flower-besprinkled mead have seen,
Mine eyes directing, as she will'd, I saw
Mine eyes on Beatrice once again.
     Mine eye, that far as it was capable,
Mirror'd, as 't were in new existences,
Mirrors, ye call them thrones, from which to us
Molded with nice exactness, and the heav'n
More fair to look on, so with voice more sweet,
More grateful to its author, whose bright beams,
More lively than that, and so preserves
More rapid than the motion, which first girds
More speedily to hear thee, tell it not "
More than the person did.  Time was not yet,
More than to death, was, 'gainst his father's will,
More then the tall ship, hurried down the flood,
More to behold, and more in love to dwell?"
More was not wanting, than the parents' faith,
"Mortal art thou in hearing as in sight;"
Moses and Samuel, and either John,
Most dear to me, I may not lose myself
Most earnest, I addressed me, and began,
Most high above the waters, all my life,
Mothers and sires, and those whom best they lov'd,
Motion to all, counted unto them forth,
Motion to motion, song to song, conjoining,
Mourn for their heavy yoke.  Upon that side,
Move Maia and Dione; here discern'd
Moves the third heaven!' and in one orb we roll,
Moving, with seed or without seed, produce.
Much evil, that will come, had never chanc'd.
Much in a narrow space.  All there shall know
     "Much more than vainly doth he loose from shore,
Much virtue would be lost, and here on earth,
Much weeping seal'd.  No purpose was of our
     Musing awhile I stood: and she, who saw
Must be pour'd back, as colour comes, through glass
Must, both in heav'n and here beneath, ensue.
Must differ.  Therefore one is Solon born;
Must in its volume change the leaves.  The first,
Must linger yet below.  Now raise thy view
Must spread them:  and the more remote from him
Must the desire inflame us to behold
My Lady, full of gladness, spake to me:
My beauty, which the loftier it climbs,
My brethren, Eliseo and Moronto.
My course here bounded, as each artist's is,
"My father!  well I mark how time spurs on
My forehead to the light, whence this had breath'd,
My gladness hides thee from me, which doth shine  .
My ken, and Robert Guiscard.  And the soul,
     "My liege, it doth enhance the joy thy words
My love for them is great, as is the good
My passage at your clime.  To you my soul
My sight directed, and on either side
My sight upon her blissful countenance,
My soaring pennons in that lofty flight
My song might shadow forth that saintly smile,
My soul is fill'd, that gladness wells from it;
My spirit reel'd, so passing sweet the strain:
Mysterious; for his high conception scar'd
My valiant service.  After him I went
My wish may have completion I must know,
My wish more earnestly than language could.
My words thy mind have treasur'd, thou henceforth
Nathan the prophet, Metropolitan
Nature, in generation, must the path
Nature in him, from bounty fall'n to thrift,
Nature, that is the seal to mortal wax,
Naught absent is nor hid: where then no change
Near as they can, approaching; and they can
Near or remote, what there avails, where God
Near to the limit, where all wishes end,
Ne'er fails to kindle love; and if aught else
Ne'er ran, as thou hast hither now return'd."
Ne'er then was penalty so just as that
Ne'er yet was run: Minerva breathes the gale,
Never did babe, that had outslept his wont,
     Never was blast from vapour charged with cold,
     Never was heart in such devotion bound,
New-garmented; nor from those billows far,
New virtue into me infus'd, and sight
Next answer'd:  "Conscience, dimm'd or by its own
     Next from the squadron, whence had issued forth
     Next issued from the deep imbosom'd splendour:
No Bacchus, and no Io Paean, but
No dispensation for commuted wrong,
No ill had power to harm, I saw rear'd up,
No less a mark than million.  He, who guards
No limit, measur'd by itself alone.
No longer new or strange to thee to hear,
No longer stainless.  Sin alone is that,
No longer than what time Latona's twins
No more shall hunger, thirst, or sorrow can.
No more to be o'erflow'd; about us thus
No more to keep me wond'ring and suspense,
"No need thy will be told, which I untold
None e'er descend, and mount them not again,
"None ever hath ascended to this realm,
None lifts his foot from earth: and hence my rule
Noon's fervid hour perchance six thousand miles
No peril of removing thee from me.
No purfled dames, no zone, that caught the eye
Nor Jove's son, when the charms of Iole
Nor all it wrought, by Roman worthies home
Nor aught avail'd, that, with Amyclas, she
Nor aught so vast or so magnificent,
Nor aught unknown to thee, which it achiev'd
Nor dares to question, when amid those pearls,
Nor deem of any change, as less than vain,
Nor demonstration physical alone,
Nor e'en the inward shaping of the brain,
Nor fully ripen'd in the flame of love,
Nor grudge myself the cause of this my lot,
Nor hath ink written, nor in fantasy
Nor height impeded, but my view with ease
Nor is there aught thou seest, that doth not fit,
Nor let him trust the fond belief, that heav'n
Nor let the Jew, who dwelleth in your streets,
Nor marvel, that a denizen of earth
Nor may I tell thee more, save that the meed
Nor miss of the reproof, which that implies,
Nor more or fewer years exist; but all
Nor of their several distances not learn.
Nor only creatures, void of intellect,
Nor the first vacant fortune, nor the tenth),
Nor thought of man hath ever reach'd so far,
Nor with oracular response obscure,
Nor yet doth linger, save unto his seeming,
No satisfaction therefore can be paid
No second hath arisen.  Next behold
     No sooner to my list'ning ear had come
No sorrowful repentance here, but mirth,
Not ceasing, but suspense, in silent pause,
Not distant, on the happy coast she stood.
Not for more knowledge, but that he may tell
Not for the fault (that doth not come to mind),
Not for themselves, but for their kindred dear,
Not for the world's sake, for which now they pore
Not from that day, when on this earth I first
Not from the centre of the sea so far
Not her alone with sacrifice ador'd
Not in reward of meritorious deed,
Not merely to exceed our human, but,
Not seldom, brother, it hath chanc'd for men
Not that I tasted of the tree, my son,
Not that the semblance of the living light
(Not through Typhaeus, but the vap'ry cloud
Not to lose pity.  On this point bethink thee,
"Not to this end was Christ's spouse with my blood,
Not unobservant, beaming in ye all,
No unribb'd pinnace, no self-sparing pilot.
Now D. now I. now L. figur'd I' th' air.
Now, clustering, where their fragrant labour glows,
Now covers.  Nor will such excess of light
     "Now, if my words be clear, if thou have ta'en
Now, if thy mind's eye pass from light to light,
Now in his word, sole, ruminating, joy'd
Now in their wane, illustrious citizens:
Now knoweth he, how all the ill, deriv'd
Now knoweth he, that the degrees of heav'n
Now let thine eyes wait heedful on my words,
Now low, and now aloft, and now around,
Now make intelligent, clearing the doubt
Now obvious and now averse, the sun.
     Now rest thee, reader!  on thy bench, and muse
     "Now, to fulfil each wish of thine, remains
Now wilt thou say, that there of murkier hue
Now, without further help, if with good heed
Numberless lights, the which in kind and size
     O Beatrice!  sweet and precious guide!
O Buondelmonte!  what ill counseling
O Christians, not, like feather, by each wind
     "O Lady!  thou in whom my hopes have rest!
     "O animals of clay!  O spirits gross I
O beg ye grace for those, that are on earth
Obeying, in humility so low,
Obstructed aught.  For, through the universe,
O'ercame, that never till that hour was thing
O'ercome the massiest air:  thereto imagine
O'erflourish'd.  Such the sires of those, who now,
O'er million lamps a sun, from whom all drew
O'er our suburban turret rose; as much
O'erpowering vision in me!  But so fair,
O'erpower us, in corporeal organs made
O'erspeedy comers to immortal life,
O'erspent, regain its virtue, with discourse
Of Aguglione's hind, and Signa's, him,
Of Beatrice, and that saintly lamp,
Of Beatrice interrupts our song.
Of Beatrice, resting, as before,
Of Beatrice's name, did bow me down
Of Bede, and Richard, more than man, erewhile,
Of Bindi and of Lapi in her streets.
Of Brenta and of Piava, there doth rise,
Of Catalonia might not work his bale.
Of Christ, and all the harvest reap'd at length
Of Italy, nor distant from thy land,
Of Joshua on the holy land, whereof
Of Montemurlo still: the Cerchi still
Of Paradise; and one in that array,
Of Pegasean race!  whose souls, which thou
Of Pietro Bernardone, and by men
Of Polyhymnia and her sisters fed
Of Ratza, who hath counterfeited ill
Of Simois revisited, and there
Of a fourth light, that now with us I saw.
O fair Clemenza, of the treachery spake
Of all around him, till assurance waits
Of all intelligential substances
Of all its goodly state: e'en so mine eyes
Of all that it contains.  The following heaven,
Of all the seven, how bulky each, how swift;
Of ample radiance!  Yet, nor amplitude
Of ancient council with the new conven'd,
O favour'd mother!  rightly nam'd Joanna!
Of beauty in that wonder.  Like the change
Of blessedness, to keep ourselves within
Of buskin or of sock hath fail'd before.
Of chamber prowess.  Montemalo yet
Of charity, who makes us will alone
Of cistern, at the fret-board, or of pipe,
Of comet splendour; and as wheels, that wind
Of creature, as may well be thought, so far
Of credulous fools beneath.  Saint Anthony
Of diverse voices is sweet music made:
Of doubt, as much as needed, rais'd my head
Of each created being, waited not
Of each thing new: by such conformity
Of elder time, in their old error blind,
Of equal clearness, like the brightening up
Of error; others well aware they err,
Of every beauty work with quicker force,
Of excellence in creature, pity mild,
Of fair Ausonia, with its boroughs old,
Of fleshly warfare, to behold the thrones
Of formal principles, and these, save one,
Of frail mortality, thenceforth to live
Of friar Thomas, and his goodly lore,
Of frozen vapours streams adown the air,
Of gladness, as here laughter: and below,
Of gladness everlasting!  that exhale
Of goodness, and in his account most priz'd,
Of good, which may not be increas'd, but forth
Of grace divine inwoven and high song
Of grace hath come, without baptismal rites
Of Gratian, who to either forum lent
Of heav'nly songsters prov'd his tuneful skill.
Of her first husband, slighted and obscure,
Of her high beauty, that all fire he seems."
Of her soft smile, she spake:  "Turn thee, and list.
Of him, but tell it not; "and things he told
Of him, that on his Maker turn'd the back,
Of him, who hears, is loth to acquiesce
Of him, who sets us here, which in these orbs
Of him, within whose mighty grasp our Lord
Of his free bounty, sign most evident
Of his free bounty, who had made them apt
Of his omniscience should not still remain
Of his return to life, than had the terms
Of holy love, that at the second death
Of holy transport had so spent its rage,
Of hope the praises in this height resound.
Of hunger, ere he one could freely choose.
Of individual star, that charmst them thus,
Of inexpressive joy.  "He," it began,
Of infinite mourning, and along the mount
Of its own lion.  They, of whom I sprang,
Of its reality.  The guide belov'd
Of jests and gibes; and, so there be no lack
Of knowledge high, whereby thou art inflam'd,
Of laughter, while he vents them, his big cowl
Of learning well retain'd, unfruitful else.
Of life eternal, of that sweetness know'st
Of light, as through aught rare beside effus'd.
Of living radiance play'd, and left me swath'd
Of lofty praises; for there came to me
Of louder trump than mine, which hasteneth on,
Of love celestial in such copious stream,
Of love, that reign'd there, fashion to my view
Of love: then added:  "Current is the coin
Of many, singly as of one express,
Of martyrdom, and for two years of hell,
Of memory in me, and endure to hear
Of mighty Constance, who from that loud blast,
Of mine eyelids did drink of it, forthwith
Of minstrel music, dulcimer, and help
Of monarchs, sprung through me from Charles and Rodolph;
Of more affection for thee, 't is my will
Of mortal life, through much importuning
Of my ascent, together with the heav'n
Of my great offices still laid aside
Of my proud keel, that singing cuts its way,
Of my sweet guide, who smiling shot forth beams
Of my wise teacher, he, whom Mary's charms
Of my words only, but that to such bliss
Of nature, that upon the world imprints
Of ne'er disturbed ether: for the rest,
Of Nerli and of Vecchio well content
Of new delight, the man, who perseveres
Of newness with succession interrupts,
Of old Anchises, in the' Elysian bower,
Of olives, easily I pass'd the heats
O fond anxiety of mortal men!
Of one amongst the new lights mov'd a voice,
Of one, whose spirit, on high musings bent,
Of other's failing, shrinks with maiden fear;
Of other's worth.  Four daughters were there born
Of our blest Lady.  Near upon my close
Of praises to the never-wint'ring sun,
Of primal splendour doth its faint reflex.
Of pudency, that stain'd it; such in her,
Of radiance, clear and lofty, seem'd methought,
Of rapt devotion ev'ry lower sphere?"
Of reason to pursue the senses' flight
Of saintly flesh, must, being thus entire,
Of satisfaction, for he could not stoop
Of scripture hold supreme authority.
Of seeing, loseth power of sight: so I
Of sempiternal roses, bending, wreath'd
Of seraphim he who is most ensky'd,
Of single chiefs, or states in league combin'd
Of social warfare; hence Torquatus stern,
Of so deep stain, that never, for the like,
Of so fell sacrifice.  Be ye more staid,
Of somewhat new to come fills with delight.
Of sore repentance in his sorrowful mood.
Of sorrow well-deserv'd shall quit your wrongs.
Of sovran light.  Thenceforward, what I saw,
Of speech, than he doth wish her in her grave.
Of splendour, shall to view less radiant seem,
Of stars fifteen, from midst the ethereal host
Of substance and of accident, beheld,
Of substance, measure, thou shalt see the heav'ns,
Of such vicissitude in heaven I thought,
Of summer and the winter frosts, content
Of that celestial furthest from the height.
Of that dark bird which nestles in his hood,
Of that enchantment.  When he saw mine eyes
Of that eternal triumph, know to us
Of that eternal worth, which is the end
Of that fair flower, whom duly I invoke
Of that idea, which our Soverign Sire
Of that lov'd monarch, in whose happy reign
Of that place, say Ascesi; for its name
Of that prime love, whose influence I feel,
Of that strong cord, that never looses dart,
Of that true constellation, and the dance
Of that will treat which hath the more of gall.
Of the Calfucci still the branchy trunk
Of the Most High.  The two that have ascended,
Of the celestial movers; or to know,
Of the deprav'd Italian land, which lies
Of the fair bride, who with the lance and nails
Of the fair sheep-fold, where a sleeping lamb
Of the fifth word they held their station,
Of the first human father dost believe,
Of the great Baron (he whose name and worth
Of the great Harry, he who, by the world
Of the great Maccabee, another move
Of the great shield, wherein the lion lies
Of the horizon.  As at an evening hour
Of their angelic bells; methought I heard
Of their perfection void, so long a space.
Of the meek man of God was told to me;
Of the mid circle can, by art, be made
Of the mind's impress; not that aught thy words
Of th' everlasting statute sunk so low,
Of the white raiment destin'd to the saints."
Of things not seen; and herein doth consist
Of this dim spot had seen, but that the sun,
Of this glad being, if thine eyes are held
Of this our orb, what of myself I tell
Of this sweet flow'r: near whom behold the seer,
Of those, who come to meddle with the text,
Of those, whom I erewhile accus'd to thee,
Of th' other; so that both have truly said."
Of thy ascending up these spheres."  Meseem'd,
Of thy dear brother, who with thee conspir'd
Of torrent downwards from a mountain's height.
Of twilight, new appearances through heav'n
Of two fierce wolves, in dread of both alike:
Of union absolute, which, many a time,
Of unreplying matter, so this course
Of verdure and of flowers: so, round about,
Of vision, marvel not: but learn the cause
Of warfare, hence permitted he is come,
Of what high worth the vow, which so is fram'd
Of what thou then appearedst, give my tongue
Of your sublunar world, was taken up,
     O gentle glitter of eternal beam!
     O grace!  unenvying of thy boon!  that gav'st
O happy father!  Felix rightly nam'd!
O hidden riches!  O prolific good!
O how much better were it, that these people
Old tales of Troy and Fesole and Rome.
O light impregnate with exceeding virtue!
O mortal men!  be wary how ye judge:
O most exceeding grace divine!  to whom,
On Beatrice shine, with second view
On Juba; and the next upon your west,
On all sides wasteth, suddenly the sky,
On beauty, such, as I believe in sooth,
On better judgment: thus the saintly came
Once more of things, that held my thought suspense,
On each side just proportion.  House was none
On earth, now hail'd in heav'n; and on pois'd wing.
One circle, light and love, enclasping it,
One from the barrier of the dark abyss,
One largest and most lustrous onward drew,
One moment seems a longer lethargy,
One motion, one impulse, with those who rule
One motion strikes on th' other.  There begin
One near us drew, and sole began:  "We all
One, of the other great and glorious prince,
One rich eternally, the other poor.
One single virtue then would be in all,
One sole eternal Godhead, of whose love
One stretches and another cramps its rule.
One tells, how at Christ's suffering the wan moon
One universal smile it seem'd of all things,
On every side the living flame decay'd.
One wak'd to tend the cradle, hushing it
One yet a babbler, loves and listens to
On firm-set poles revolving, trail'd a blaze
On her lov'd daughter, that with moveless eye
On his already over-laden bark.
On his religion.  Then, when numerous flock'd
On its own unity revolving still.
Only nine years have compass him about.
Only that, whence it kindles, none is lost,
Only to yield thee gladness of my voice,
On mine; a point I saw, that darted light
On other thoughts: bethink thee, that near Him
On set conditions: spirits all releas'd,
On that maim'd stone set up to guard the bridge,
On the baptiz'd: nor I, for sigil-mark
On the clear wave.  Know then, the soul of Rahab
On the high triumph of thy realm to gaze!
On the third Caesar look; for to his hands,
On th' everlasting counsel, and explore,
On th' everlasting light, wherein no eye
On th' everlasting splendour, that I look'd,
"On this fifth lodgment of the tree, whose life
On th' other part, facing to Peter, lo!
On th' other, where an intersected space
On to the summit prompts us.  This invites,
On upward gazing, said, "Look down and see
Onward my sight their semblances pursued;
On which, the crown, already o'er its state
Open'd her lips, and gracious thus began:
Openly or in secret, shall with him
Open thy mind to what I now unfold,
     "Ope thou thine eyes, and mark me: thou hast seen
     "O plant!  from whence I spring! rever'd and lov'd!
     O prime enlightener!  thou who crav'st me strength
Or act, what next behoov'd;  and did descry
Or art or nature in the human flesh,
Ordains its providence to be the virtue
O reader!  to the lofty wheels, with me,
Or early, at her pleasure; for they were
Or else its poison.  Here confess reveal'd
Or ere another, circling, compass'd it,
Or ere that longing be allay'd."  So spake
Or ere that work engag'd me, I did hold
Or ere the crop be ripe.  For I have seen
Or even thou advance thee further, hence
Or ever death his fated term prescribe;
Or from its straightness warp'd: no reck'ning made
Or hear.  And, as a pilgrim, when he rests
Or in its limn'd resemblance, can combine
Or more intelligential and abstruse,
Or more of love is witness'd in those flames:
Or more or less, so far it follows force.
Or on more vile allowance.  Mortal flesh
Or other for him, lest more freight be laid
Or other's shame, will feel thy saying sharp.
Or shown me such similitude of God.
Or silver; I with pray'rs and fasting mine;
Or through division been with vermeil dyed."
Or when they clos'd.  As he, who looks intent,
Or wherefore, worthy spirit!  for thy lot
Or why to thee more joyous I appear,
     "O saintly sire and spirit!"  I began,
     "O saintly sister mine!  thy prayer devout
O slight respect of man's nobility!
"O spirit, born for joy!  who in the rays
Others to hoist them.  Down the palfrey's sides
Others with better voice may pray, and gain
      "O thou of primal love the prime delight!
Ought not to pierce thee; since thou find'st, the wings
Our Sirens with their tuneful pipes, as ray
Our Sovran Lord--that settleth this estate
Our Veronica, and the while 't is shown,
Our greater muse may claim) the pious ghost
Our hearts, whose high affections burn alone
Our intellect is to such depth absorb'd,
Our ladder reaches even to that clime,
Our language.  And as birds, from river banks
Our love shall shine around that raiment, bright,
Our mind can satisfy her thirst to know:
Our resurrection certain, if thy mind
Our shape, regarmented with glorious weeds
Our wages with the merit; and admire
Our weaker thought, how one dimension thus
Outgrew herself; and, in the transport lost.
Out of his own sufficiency to pay
Out of its proper climate, thrives but ill.
Over my nature, that no natural motion,
Over such countless mirrors, yet remains
Over the cruelty, which bars me forth
Over the garden Catholic to lead
"O virgin mother, daughter of thy Son,
     O what o'erflowing plenty is up-pil'd
"O ye!  in chosen fellowship advanc'd
'O ye!  whose intellectual ministry
PARADISE
Pale January must be shor'd aside
Parhelion unto all things, and naught else
Partaking of sweet life, as more or less
Partition of our city first is reach'd
Part of the Christian people should be set,
Part of the angels fell: and in their fall
Part the nice level; e'en so brief a space
Pass by so suddenly.  And as the moon
Pass through, there needs must be a limit, whence
Pastime of heav'n, the which those ardours sing,
Paying with unstamp'd metal for their fare.
Peer'd on that last resplendence, while I heard:
Peer with faint glimmer, doubtfully descried;
Pent with the world's incumbrance.  Those, whom here
Perchance, as is the halo from the light
Perchance he doth not wholly miss the truth.
Perennial, which in bright expansiveness,
Perfect, entire, and for fulfillment ripe.
     Perhaps my saying over bold appears,
Permits not from its beams their feet to stray."
Persuades me to this faith; but from that truth
Peter and Paul live yet, and mark thy doings.
Peter had then circled my forehead thus.
     "Philosophy," said I, ''hath arguments,
Piccarda, in the tardiest sphere thus plac'd,
Pierces the universe, and in one part
Pietro Damiano there was I y-clept:
Pietro the sinner, when before I dwelt
Plac'd all his love below on just and right:
Plac'd me high garden, from whose hounds
Place in this heav'n is none, the soul divine,
Play'd tremulous; then forth these accents breath'd:
Possess'd me.  Yet I mark'd it was a hymn
Possess'd me, as soon as these had met my view,
Power, but to leave one sparkle of thy glory,
Power to look up, and I beheld myself,
Precise and unambiguous lore, replied
Predestination!  is thy root from such
Predestin'd, we are carried by the force
Prefacing, next it added;  "he, of whom
Prepare to quaff our blood.  O good beginning
Present itself to the triumphal throng,
Preserve it; yet not bent, as Jephthah once,
Prevail'd on thee to break the plighted bond
Princedoms in heaven; yet are of love so full,
Proceeded, with voice, alter'd from itself
Produc'd coeval.  Yet in order each
Prompts me to tell of th' other guide, for whom
Proportion'd to its power, the dusk or clear."
"Propose the mark (which even now I view)
Proves bitter to his seed; and, on the right,
Pure and without disguise, which they below,
Pursued her, when in dimness she was lost,
Pursued, intently, as the eye pursues
Puts forth her radiant brow, all, light by light,
Qui judicatis terram.  In the M.
Quirinus of so base a father springs,
Raban is here:  and at my side there shines
Rachel with Beatrice. Sarah next,
Rain'd down upon the ancient bond and new,--
Raise loud the voice, and spring with gladder bound;
Range wide o'er all the pastures.  Arm of God!
Rang through the spheres; and "Holy, holy, holy,"
Ran purely through the last mechanic's veins.
Ran straight and speedy, perish at the last,
Rather it is inherent in this state
Reach not its utmost depth."  Like to the lark,
Reading in the straw-litter'd street."  Forthwith,
Rebuk'd the ling'ring tardiness of death.
Rebuk'd the stubborn nations.  The three nymphs,
Receiv'd us, as the wave a ray of light
Receives, and rests unbroken.  If I then
Receptacle unto that Good, which knows
Recorded in the sun, whose liberal orb
Records it not; and the pen passeth on
Recover'd; and, well nigh astounded, ask'd
Reduplicate upon the chequer'd board.
Re'enter'd, still another rose.  "The thirst
Reflected from the summit of the first,
Reflected semblances to see of whom
Reflected shine the judgments of our God:
Reflected, which behind it lead conceals.
Rejoicing, dominations first, next then
Rejoicing in the countenance of God,
Releas'd him merely, or else man himself
Relenting mercy, large munificence,
Remember ye be men, not senseless beasts;
Remembrance there needs none to gather up
Remote and tempting, first a man might die
Removable: nor think to cleanse ourselves
Removeth from the east her eager ken;
Render sweet harmony among these wheels.
Renew'd the strain.  Then parting from the rest
Replied:  "I see that thou believ'st these things,
Resembling one accustom'd to command:
Resembling thus the artist in her work,
Resolve so steadfast dwells.  And by these words
Resounded all the spheres.  "Praise we one God!"
Resum'd alternate:  "Need there is (tho' yet
Return.  These are the questions which thy will
Return below, open thy lips, nor hide
Returning, cross their flight, while some abide
Reveal'd, whose genial influence makes now
Reversal of their lot to many people,
Revisit, nor put out to open sea,
Revolving; and the rest unto their dance
Rich men and beggars interchanging fortunes.
Rich slope of mountain high, whence heat and cold
Right plainly, ponder, who he was, and what
Rise scatter'd, source of augury to th' unwise;
Rises to mortals, but through that which joins
 Rob'd, as the rest, in glory.  Joy benign
Round Beatrice thrice it wheel'd about,
Rued its stern bearing.  After, near the hour,
Rush, with such eager straining, to the milk,
Sabellius, Arius, and the other fools,
Sad Cleopatra, who, pursued by it,
Safe in herself and constant unto him,
Said Beatrice, "that behooves thy ken
Said I, "blest Spirit!  Therefore will of his
Said he, "and let the destin'd years come round."
Sang, with such melody, as but to hear
Save that which cometh from the pure serene
Saw Loire and Seine, and every vale, that fills
Saw her so glorious and so just, that ne'er
Saw in one volume clasp'd of love, whatever
Saw me in anxious thought suspense, and spake:
Saw wherefore I was silent, prompted me
Say then, my honour'd stem!  what ancestors
"Say, whence the costly jewel, on the which
Say, who that angel is, that with such glee
Scipio and Pompey triumph'd; and that hill,
Seated in state, the queen, that of this realm
Seconds his teacher gladly, "Hope," said I,
Secure of censure, yet at bare report
Seek her: and, with affection, whilst I sue,
Seem'd as reflected splendour, while I mus'd;
Seem'd fire, breath'd equally from both.  Oh speech
Seem'd from her visage shining, thus began:
Seem'd it unto me turn'd from length to round,
Seem'd reascending, and a higher pitch
Seems blunt and forceless in comparison."
Seems different, and not from dense or rare.
See the whole vision be made manifest.
Selected, that, with lively ray serene,
Sends out a tinkling sound, of note so sweet,
Set down with faithful pen!  let now thy voice
Set forth, and from him first receiv'd the seal
Set upon sold and lying privileges;
Shall, as the wind doth, smite the proudest summits;
Shall be deliver'd from the adult'rous bond."
Shall bring to face it.  The eighth sphere displays
Shall face thee, which thy questioning declares
Shall find his avarice there and cowardice;
Shall from thy presence gild the highest sphere."
Shall, in the vengeance it dispenseth, find
Shall quiver where it falls.  Within the heaven,
Shall roar so loud, that fortune shall be fain
Shall sorrow for its godless shepherd's fault,
Shall there enact, as doth 1n summer cloud
Shall turn 'gainst thee:  but in a little while
Share equally) the more is to preserve.
She added, "if thou wish thy cure, my words,
     She ceas'd from further talk, and then began
She chants the loud hosanna:  while, oppos'd
She cry'd, "at this my smiling, when I see
Shed lightnings from above, yet saw I not
Sheds more resplendence, elsewhere less.  In heav'n,
     She ended, and appear'd on other thoughts
She had no armlets and no head-tires then,
She had no cause at which to grieve: with these
She leaves to you, as ye do most affect it.
She led me up in this ladder, steep and long;
She looks on pious pray'rs: then fasten'd they
She, of the time prevenient, on the spray,
She should remain a trophy, to declare
     She somewhat smil'd, then spake:  "If mortals err
     She (such as I bequeath her to the bruit
     She then resum'd:  "Thou certainly wilt see
She tow'rds me bent her eyes, with such a look,
She was inspir'd to name him of his owner,
     She with those other spirits gently smil'd,
Shine at my blandishments; and, as it grew
Shines Romeo's light, whose goodly deed and fair
     Short space ensued; I was not held, I say,
Shot from a bow three-corded.  And as ray
Shot from the bow of exile.  Thou shalt prove
Should be their glory.  Slow, and full of doubt,
Should scan such secret truth; for he had learnt
Shouldst be confronted, so that having view'd
Should stint the measure of my fair desert?
Should they not hearken, who, to give me will
Show yet more gracious.  Therefore shall increase,
Shrink, as the leaf doth from the thunderbolt.
Sichaeus and Creusa, than did I,
Silenced that lyre harmonious, and still'd
Silent and moveless.  "This is he, who lay
Simple and mix'd, both form and substance, forth
Since from things sensible alone ye learn
Since he returns not such as he set forth,
Since it befalls, that in most instances
Since thy fair guide and lovely, in her look
Since to appearance his intention is
Singing, methinks, their bliss and primal good.
Sizii and Arigucci yet were drawn.
Slew his own mother, so made pitiless
Smiles from within and radiance from above,
Smites it, remains dismantled of the hue
Smote fiercest, where resistance was most stout.
So Beatrice in her semblance chang'd:
So I again resorted to the lore
So I beheld the new effulgence come
So I, in silence, arm'd me, while she spake,
So I, the whilst she said, awe-stricken bow'd.
So as thy heart may, in its blithest mood,
So, as when Marsyas by thy hand was dragg'd
So, at his sudden waking, he misdeems
So bright, as none was left more goodly there.
So bright, that in my thought: said: "The love,
So burly are they grown: and from behind
So burn'd the peaceful oriflamb, and slack'd
     So, by that form divine, was giv'n to me
So clean, the semblance did not alter more.
So courteously unto thee.  But the track,
So cumb'rous it may speedily sink the bark,
So dear and beautiful, they cannot brook
So different effects flow'd from one act,
So faint of our impictur'd lineaments,
So far discreetly hath thy lips unclos'd
So far pursued, as till the space between
So feelingly, each argument beside
So fiercely), as along the eternal twins
So firmly to God's service I adher'd,
So fortune deals with Florence.  Hence admire not
     So forward stretch'd him (if of credence aught
So from the lights, which there appear'd to me,
So great, in reference to him, who took
So heavenly, ran, yet deem'd his footing slow.
So hidden, they have in belief alone
So in our life the different degrees
So into greater jubilee were chang'd
Sole in thyself that dwellst; and of thyself
Sole understood, past, present, or to come!
Sole with my lady, to more lofty bliss
So lifted I my gaze; and bending so
So lofty was the summit; down whose steps
So loud, it hath no likeness here: nor I
Solution of the maze.  What I have heard,
Some ill-mark'd vestige of that primal beam.
Some less approaching to their primal source.
Some mounting, and some less; e'en as the sun,
Some speed their way a-field, and homeward some,
Sometime Latona's daughter we behold,
So mighty art thou, lady!  and so great,
So mighty in renown, as every muse
So much, that venerable Bernard first
So much the restless eagerness to shine
So multiplied in thee, it leads thee up
Song, that as much our muses doth excel,
So of her act, that through the eyesight pass'd
Soon as its final word the blessed flame
Soon as my peace I held, compass'd me thrice
     Soon, as the saintly spirit, by his silence,
Soothes him, and he is cheer'd; for thus she spake,
Soothing me:  "Know'st not thou, thou art in heav'n?
So passing lovely, Beatrice show'd,
So pitiful of semblance, that perforce
So plenteously, that I on others shower
     So, reader, as my hope is to return
     So ready and so cordial an "Amen,"
So rested, and the mingling sound was still,
So, round about me, fulminating streams
     So rov'd my ken, and its general form
     So said I to the brightness, which erewhile
     So said, she turn'd toward the heav'n her face.
So saw I move that stately sign, with praise
     So saying, to his assembly back he drew:
So shall delight make thee not feel thy toil.
So shalt thou many a famous spirit behold."
So sharp, no lid, unclosing, may bear up
So she who doth imparadise my soul,
So shines, that, were no temp'ring interpos'd,
So stood the dame erect, and bent her glance
So strongly from this star, that of his deeds
So suddenly doth the fair child of him,
So suddenly from good to better, time
So sweetly, the delight hath left me never.
So that it bears the mighty tide, and bursts not
So that it fell to fabled names of Jove,
     "So that men, thus at variance with the truth
So that our wishes rest for ever here.
So that she seems to contradict me here.
So that the fleet run onward; and true fruit,
So that the sight sustain'd it not at first.
So that they needs into strange pastures wide
So that thy anxious thought is in itself
So that thy knowledge waits not on thy faith:
So that 't is hard to see which more offends.
So there new substances, methought began
So thickly studded, in the depth of Mars,
Sought the celestial guide, and were by her
Sow'd the good seed, whose harvest now they keep.
So worthy, and with me have mov'd this throng."
Span the thin cloud, the outer taking birth
Spare not; and of our radiance take thy fill."
Sparkles a mother's fondness on her son)
Sparkles innumerable on all sides
Sparkles instinct with life; and in the flow'rs
Sparkles of virtue shall shoot forth in him,
"Speak, speak unto thy lady, that she quench
Sped to her rescue.  Judge then for thyself
Spins ever on its axle night and day,
Spirits, whom fame hath note of.  For the mind
"Splendour eternal, piercing through these folds,
Spread their broad mantles, so as both the beasts
Spring, like a shoot, around the stock of truth;
Sprinkle him.  Of the fount ye alway drink,
Starts; motionless the centre, and the rest
Still doth the file of Hebrew dames proceed.
Still in this depth below.  But search around
Still makes the fathers chary to their sons,
Still shed new heat and vigour through my soul!
Stood, eminent, whatever from our earth
Stood in mute wonder 'mid the works of Rome,
Stood lively before me.  "Child of grace!"
Straight or athwart, now rapid and now slow,
     Straight to the shadow which for converse seem'd
Stretch their clasp'd hands, in furtherance of my suit!"
Subjected and supreme.  And there was born
Substance that nature and the human join'd.
Such an hosanna sounded, as hath left
Such as I best can frame, give thanks to Him,
Such as from memory glide and fall away.
Such as in Christ, or ere he came, believ'd.
Such, as or ere the Lamb of God was slain,
Such as the youth, who came to Clymene
     Such cheering accents from the second flame
     Such close was to the circling melody:
Such fables Florence in her pulpit hears,
Such faithful and such fair equality,
Such floods of gladness on her visage shower'd,
Such frequent question; for thou saidst--'A man
Such good of mine is spoken.  Where one is,
Such help, as favour wins in Paradise.
     Such keenness from the living ray I met,
Such mere effulgence in her eyes, such joy,
Such nature on him, and endur'd the doom.
Such one, as hath become a Florentine,
Such satisfaction offer'd, as outweighs
Such scantiness of knowledge our delight:
Such was my cheer, when Beatrice drove
     Such was the flow of that pure rill, that well'd
Such was the image glanc'd into my mind,
Such was the meed; of lively hope, that wing'd
Such was the song.  Who doth not prune his wing
Such weal is in the love, that stills this heav'n;
     Such were the accents towards my lady breath'd
     Such were the words that Beatrice spake:
     Sudden, as I perceiv'd them, deeming these
Suffic'd me; henceforth there is need of both
Suffice of my forefathers: who they were,
Sufficeth all.  O ye misguided souls!
Sufficient: not the number to search out
Suited in strict and wondrous harmony."
Summoning up each argument to aid;
Superillustrans claritate tua
Suppliant to thee he kneels, imploring grace
Supported, lifts me so above myself,
"Supreme of gifts, which God creating gave
Surpasseth power of him who comes from thence;
Surpassing, as in height, above them all,
Surpassing far its utmost potency.
Surpassing, who themselves did make the crown,
Surpass our usage, as the swiftest heav'n
Suspected peril at a whistle's breath,
Suspended, holds thine eyes--or ere thyself
Suspended so they stood: and, from within,
Suspense and wand'ring, I became as one,
Swaying the world, till through successive hands
     Sweet love!  that dost apparel thee in smiles,
Sweet medicine to clear and strengthen sight,
      Sweet star!  what glorious and thick-studded gems
Swift almost as the heaven ye behold.
T' advance him to the meed, which he had earn'd
Take then no vow at random: ta'en, with faith
Tangled in net of sensual delight,
"Tell who ye are," I cried.  Forthwith it grew
Temper'd of thee and measur'd, charm'd mine ear,
Temper so evenly affection in us,
Tempting the sweet with bitter:  she meanwhile,
Term by th' eternal counsel pre-ordain'd,
Th' affection mark'd, when that its sway hath ta'en
Than any other in this gladsome throng.
Than erst, it wax'd:  and, as himself the sun
Than five.  Mark Luni, Urbisaglia mark,
Than five-and-twenty ages had appear'd
Than from its state in Paradise; nor means
Than have those spirits which so late thou saw'st;
Than in their visage beaming.  Cinctur'd thus,
Than in the other part the ray is shown,
Than now for him, my prayers to thee prefer,
Than shall our fleshly robe, which yonder earth
Than such, to whom his name was never known.
Than swine, who diet at his lazy board,
Than the blind lamb; and oftentimes one sword
Than to do fitting honour to the bride;
Than to have them within, and bear the stench
Than water flowing not unto the sea.
That Constance held affection to the veil;
That Esau is so wide of Jacob:  hence
That I beheld it bick'ring sparks around,
That I should look aloft: but, ere he bade,
That I should rest.  To thy first question thus
That I the tenour of my creed unfold;
That Providence, who so well orders all,
That Rhone, when he hath mix'd with Sorga, laves.
That Trojan Ripheus in this round was set
That Ubertino of Donati grudg'd
That a few circling seasons hide for thee!
That after doth increase by loving, shines
That a just vengeance was by righteous court
That all in counterpoise must kick the beam.
     "That all the world," said I, "should have bee turn'd
That all with mutual impulse tend to God.
That all your world craves tidings of its doom:
That Alpha and Omega, is to all
That also tell."  As those, who in a ring
That ancient father of the holy church,
That as ofttimes but ill accords the form
That as their warfare was alike, alike
That bare the lively pressure of my zeal,
That blessed spirit; and I fed on mine,
That blessed spirit may not lie; since near
That bows its lithe top till the blast is blown;
That burns amongst us, what thy mind conceives,
That, by its outward bright'ning, testified
That canst not lift thy head above the waves
That circumcision in the males should imp
That covert, which hath hidden from thy search
That cowl them with six shadowing wings outspread?
That dense and rare were cause.  Here I sustain'd
That did ingem the sixth light, ceas'd the chiming
That doubly seest in every wedded bride
That draw thee towards him; so that thou report
That each good, found without it, is naught else
That e'en till death they may keep watch or sleep
That ended, through the high celestial court
That, ere he died, saw all the grievous times
That essence, which discovers by what means
That ever the first virtue fram'd, admires
That every counterfeit, who spreads abroad
That families fail, when cities have their end.
That, fickle wanton, leaves its mother's milk,
That figure me, those, glittering in mine eye,
That fledg'd my cheek: nor she of Rhodope,
That force and will are blended in such wise
That from their impious worship I reclaim'd
That giveth me the captain of the church
That glitterance, wafted on alternate wing,
That God should by his own ways lead him back
That grac'd my lady, gave me ample proof
That hast such favour in my seed vouchsaf'd!"
That hath Saint John for guardian, what was then
That hath for confine only light and love,
That hath his eye already keen for bart'ring!
That hath his eyes most fix'd on God, shall solve
That hath made wander both the sheep and lambs,
That hath so many lights, this being divides,
That have intelligence and love, are pierc'd.
That he, as I have done rang'd them; and nam'd
That he had ris'n in silence, and was prostrate,
That held me in so sweet imprisonment.
That here exceeds our pow'r; thanks to the place
That he who grace desireth, and comes not
That he, who in the sacred forum sways,
That he would look from whence the fog doth rise,
That holy pleasure here not yet reveal'd,
That honour and renown might wait on them:
That, if mine eyes had turn'd away, methinks,
That if there be in heav'n a realm, that shows
That image stampt by the' everlasting pleasure,
That, in a cloud imprison'd doth break out
That inasmuch as there is fear of woe
That, indistinctly heard, with ravishment
That in its orb impels ye, fate decreed
That in my thoughts I of that sacred realm
     That, in their own land, each one must be clad
"That in this court," said I, "O sacred lamp!
That in thy joy art shrouded!  say the cause,
That is each round shows more divinity,
That is in heav'n most lustrous, nor the seraph
That it may issue, bearing true report
That it might yield contentment to my wish;
That joy was in the eyes of all the blest.
That largeliest of his light partakes, was I,
That life can teem with; such the burden fill'd
That, long as till thy vision, on my form
That lookst on this and doth endure so long."
That luminary, in which the wondrous life
That made him peer among the ocean gods;
That made me seem like needle to the star,
That makes Falicia throng'd with visitants!"
That makes us ready servants, as thou seest,
That make the circle of the vision, he
     "That man, who was unborn, himself condemn'd,
That memory cannot follow.  Nathless all,
That mortal, who was at his birth impress
That mouldy mother is where late were lees.
That mountain, at whose side Cassino rests,
That moves the sun in heav'n and all the stars.
That moves, which being hence and vigour takes,
That murmuring of the eagle, and forthwith
That must befall his seed:  but, "Tell it not,"
That nearer to the level of our thought
That next resplendence issues from the smile
That no created ken may fathom it.
That now bears mine: for not with fiercer flame
That now is laden with new felony,
That of confession I no longer thought.
That of feet nail'd already to the cross.
That of her laughing eyes the radiance brake
That of his temple Janus barr'd the door.
That of that happy realm the shadow'd form
That of these natures he might count the tribes.
That one, who looks upon that light, can turn
That on the dexter of the cross extends,
That on the right hand of our successors
That on the sov'ran essence, which it wells from,
That on the sovran pleasure he may gaze.
That onward thence from Gades I beheld
That on white forehead set a pearl as strong
That other host, that soar aloft to gaze
That our infirm affection here below
That overcame me, seeming (for it did)
That overhangs their couch, with wakeful gaze
That paint through all its gulfs the blue profound
That planet must throughout be void, nor fed
That plays the dragon after him that flees,
That pleader for the Christian temples, he
That power produc'd, which was the third and last."
That providence celestial overrul'd,
That quadrants in the round conjoining frame.
That rears his head, and claps him with his wings,
That rose and sought its natal seed of fire;
That round them fleet, gazing the Godhead next,
That save its Maker, none can to the full
That shapes the cloak according to the cloth:
That she might serve for purchase of base gold:
That sorely sheet the region.  From one root
That, sparkling in thine eyes, denotes thy joy,
That spirits to the stars, as Plato deem'd,
That sprang from it, still trickles in my heart.
That sun, which erst with love my bosom warm'd
That taper's radiance, to whose view was shown,
That the circumference were too loose a zone
That the true light, which fills them with desire,
That they surcease not ever, day nor night,
"That thou at length mayst happily conclude
That thou mayst penetrate the brightness, far
That thou mayst see as clearly as myself.
That thou mayst see, he was a king, who ask'd
That thou mayst use thyself to own thy thirst
That thou shouldst answer me; but for her sake,
That to God's paupers rightly appertain,
That to himself the other arrogates:
That to my will gave wings; and I began
That tongue nor pen may follow it.  Tow'rds Spain
That to please thee 't will be as sweet to rest."
     "That, to the eye of man, our justice seems
That to the influencing of these orbs revert
That 'twixt ye two, the contrary to that
That underneath the burning lion's breast
That, virtue sinking in me overpower'd,
That voice which joins the inexpressive song,
That waits the sloping beam, which Phaeton
That warbling in the air expatiates long,
That was beguiled of Demophoon;
That weaves her zone.  In the celestial court,
That we had entered there.  And as in flame
That 'well they thrive;' and that 'no second such
'That well they thrive not sworn with vanity."'
That were below, ere they arriv'd in heav'n,
That were his foes, have little cause for mirth.
That were the grave of Peter's soldiery,
That, whatsoe'er has past them, I commend.
That, whatsoever I had yet beheld,
That when man offers, God well-pleas'd accepts;
That, when my spirit, which thou madest whole,
That, which digested rightly after turns
That, which thou seest in the under bow,
That, which was late behind thee.  But, in sign
That which we hold through faith, not shown by proof,
That, while she spake her image all did burn,
That will not, still survives unquench'd, and doth
That winter's month were but a single day,
That wish can dare no further--every soul,
That with a ken of such wide amplitude
That with great craving long hath held my soul,
That with no costlier viands than the juice
That writes but to cancel, think, that they,
That yet is moisten'd at his mother's breast.
That yet no glimmer of its majesty
That yet was new to me, from the recess,
T' have rang'd themselves in fashion of two signs
T' have ta'en thy stand apart shall well become thee.
Th' avowal, which he led to; and resum'd:
The Alberichi, Greci and Ormanni,
The Alpine rocks, whence glide thy currents, Po!
The County Guido, and whoso hath since
The Decii, and the Fabii hence acquir'd
The Emperor Conrad; and his knighthood he
The English and Scot, impatient of their bound.
The Gospel, and that ye yourselves did write,
The Holy Spirit's song, and bare about
The Lady higher up enshrine in heaven,
The Mantuan mov'd him, still was I debarr'd
The Pope recks little now.  Thy city, plant
The Ravignani sat, of whom is sprung
The Spaniard and the Indian, with the Jew.
The Sun of angels, him, who by his grace
The Supreme Good; light, ministering aid,
The Sybil's sentence.  O eternal beam!
The Tuscan air; and afterward, when grace
The Ughi, Catilini and Filippi,
     "The angels, O my brother!  and this clime
The angel's once to Mary, thus replied:
The apostolic radiance, whose behest
The appellation of that star, which views,
The appetite remains, that this is ask'd,
The ardour of my wish (for so behooved),
The ark from town to town; now doth he know
The army of Christ (which it so clearly cost
The arrow, seen beforehand, slacks its flight."
The atomies of bodies, long or short,
The beak discourse; and, what intention form'd
The beauteous image, in fruition sweet
The beautiful Trinacria lies in gloom
The beggar's craft.  The Conti were possess'd
The being of the world, and mine own being,
The better disclose his glory: whence
The body's, in variety of food:
The bottom from the shore, in the wide main
The brief assurance, than I understood
     The brightness, where enclos'd the treasure smil'd,
The burden on his shoulders, unreleas'd
The chiefest nobles.  Those, highest in bliss,
The choicest of thy love for God.  But say,
The circles, to the furthest, till thou spy
The circle thereto most conjoin'd observe;
The circuit widen'd, noting the increase
The city's malady hath ever source
The clay was made, accomplish'd with each gift,
The close proportion.  Hence doth heav'nly justice
The coin of Venice.  O blest Hungary!
The column, cloth'd with verrey, still was seen
The compact, made with Noah, of the world
The counterfeited semblance thrown aside;
The country's custom.  We descry above,
The covenant the other.  For the last,
The cowls to sacks choak'd up with musty meal.
The dame, so joyous enter, that the orb
The dame, who was his surety, in her sleep
The day-star of mine eyes; then thus subjoin'd:
The death which he endur'd that I should live,
The decretals, as their stuft margins show,
     "The deep things," I replied, "which here I scan
The delicate living there of the Bohemian,
The divine will, by which our wills with his
The dwellers round about, who with the world
The earth and water, and all things of them
The elder proposition and the new,
Thee slow in motion, as a weary man,
The essence then, where such advantage is,
The' eternal might, which, broken and dispers'd
The ever-blessed image wav'd its wings,
     The eyes, that heav'n with love and awe regards,
The eye to follow it, erewhile at rest,
The eye was kindled: and the blessed sign
The failure of his vows, that in your scale
The father and the master, with his spouse,
The fervour, which it kindles; and that too
The festival of Thomas still revives)
Th' effect of grace divine and merit preceding.
The filth of paganism, and for their ways
The firmament looks forth serene, and smiles;
The first fruit of Christ's vicars on the earth,
The first seems still, and, as it flew, the last;
The flavour, which, not tasted, passes far
The flight of innocent wings:  but since the day
"The flood," I answer'd, "from the Spirit of God
The floor of heav'n, was crown'd. " Angelic Love
The fondness, that stirs in him and conforms
The forward path again; so as the way
The fountain at whose source these drink their beams,
The fountain whence they flow'd.  O gracious virtue!
The fountain whence your arts derive their streame.
The fresh leaves, with which Europe sees herself
The fuming of that incense, when I knew
The gates, at which she enter'd, and did light
The gateway, named from those of Pera, led
The gilded hilt and pommel, in his house.
The glitterance of Christ.  From horn to horn,
The glories of our court, thou mayst therewith
The glorious Spirit, of whom I speak to thee,
The good it apprehends.  I well discern,
The gospel and great teachers laid aside,
The grace divine, albeit e'en his sight
"The grace, that holds sweet dalliance with thy soul,
The grace, whence true love lighteth first his flame,
The greater blessedness preserves the more.
The greater is the body (if all parts
The hallow'd place again.  In them, had will
The halter of Jerusalem shall see
The hands of holy promise, finds a throng
The happy Callaroga, under guard
The heart he had, begging his life by morsels,
The hearts of monks so wanton: for whate'er
The heed, wherewith I do prepare myself
The higher creatures see the printed steps
The higher they are ris'n; and that there
The hollow'd wrestler, gentle to his own,
The honour and the blame in human acts,
The house, from whence your tears have had their spring,
     The increate perpetual thirst, that draws
The influence of their dew."  Whileas I spake,
The intellectual efficacy unfolds
Their beamy circlets, dancing to the sounds.
Their being, on which credence hope sublime
Their brightness downward, thousand miles below.
Their changes and their various aspects
Their childish looks and voice declare as much.
Their circles in the horologe, so work
Their circling.  Of that fatal lapse the cause
Their concord and glad looks, wonder and love,
Their course shall so evince their brutishness
Their energy to save: for nought, that lies
Their fame, which I with duteous zeal embalm.
Their fat and leanness, in like manner this
Their flame enliven, so that light I saw
Their heavenly banqueting; but when an end
Their influences from above deriving,
Their living waters, and have fed its plants.
Their love and vision fix'd.  O trinal beam
Their new-found pastures; so, within the lights,
The iron hot, or on her anvil mould them."
Their orders, marshal'd in his thought.  From him
Their radiance as from ours the starry train:
Theirs and not thine shall be the crimson'd brow
Their separate distinctions variously
Their substance, and create the' informing virtue
Their traffic in that sanctuary, whose walls
Their unaccomplishable work began.
Their vizors off, look other than before,
Their wavy summits all the fervent band,
Their wax, and that which molds it, differ much:
Their wished looks, and to bring home their food,
The isle of fire by old Anchises honour'd
The judgment of Timaeus, who affirms
The keenness of my sight.  But not the soul,
The ken, your world is gifted with, descends
The kingdom of the heavens, and overcome
The leader, under whom on manna fed
The lessons love can read me."  Yet again
The light communicated, which through heaven
The light eternal, which to view alone
The lily from the lance had hung reverse,
The limits of his German shores.  The realm,
The lively flame dilates, and like heav'n's star
The living Justice, in whose breath I move,
The living justice, of the which thou mad'st
The lofty rapture from that womb inspir'd,
The love for Him, that held me, it eclips'd
The love, that did inhabit there, replied:
The loving million of the Christian faith,
The lowest: in the midst, bound with strict league,
The lustre of the seal should be complete:
The lustre, that erewhile bespake me, smiling
The matter and the substance of the vow,
The meed, as unto each in due degree
The merit of his soul-impassion'd strains
The mighty Baptist that way marks the line
The mighty charge was given."  Thus she spake,
The mighty contest won with either palm;
The mind remounts not without aid.  Thus much
The mind, that here is radiant, on the earth
The more below his triumph, who from hence
The more it warms thee, pleases me the more.
The more the doer's good intent appears,
The more, the loftier their vision.  Those,
The murmuring of a river, that doth fall
Then  "Glory to the Father, to the Son,
     Then I:  "What various here above appears,
Then added:  "So interpret thou, my son,
Then all roll'd upward like an eddying wind.
Then answer'd with such gladness, that she seem'd
Then as a troop of maskers, when they put
Then, as at shaking of a lighted brand,
Then, as if drunk with odors, plung'd again
The nations shall take note.  His unripe age
The nature, from its Maker far estrang'd,
The nature in assumption doom'd: ne'er wrong
The nature, in whom naught unequal dwells,
The nature with its Maker thus conjoin'd,
     Then by the spirit, that doth never leave
Thence many rivulets have since been turn'd,
Thence priz'd of me the more.  Glad thou hast made me.
Then eagerness to speak embolden'd me;
The next, and whereon thy belief hath grown."
Then follow'd:  "No unpleasant thirst, tho' long,
Then heard I:  "Wherefore holdest thou that each,
Then heard I echoing on from choir to choir,
Then look what it hath err'd to, thou shalt find
Then lov'd her more devoutly.  She, bereav'd
Then must our wishes jar with the high will
Then newly, Love!  by whom the heav'n is rul'd,
The novel wonder, and trace out the form,
     Then saw I a bright band, in liveliness
     Then saw I clearly how each spot in heav'n
Then saw I of an eagle, lively
Then saw I sprinkled over all the sky.
Then seem'd they like to ladies, from the dance
Then seem'd to me so much of heav'n to blaze
     Then still abiding in that ensign rang'd,
Then thus began:  "Among themselves all things
Then to the beauteous eyes mine eyes return'd.
Then, trilling out his last sweet melody,
Then turn'd them back, directed on the light
Then turn'd to Beatrice, and in her looks
Then turn'd toward them, cause behind thy back
The number of the chosen: and esteem
Then, with sage doctrine and good will to help,
The oars, erewhile dash'd frequent in the wave,
The offering, still to offer.  Th' other part,
The old and new, is yours: and for your guide
The only fords were left through which to wade,
The other bright beatitude, that seem'd
The other cause: and if the other fall,
The other comes and goes; so in that light
The other following, with the laws and me,
The other, nearest, who adorns our quire,
The other points, both which thou hast inquir'd,
The others kept their station: and this task,
The other splendour of cherubic light.
The other, through the riches of that grace,
The other trine, that with still opening buds
The other worthily should also be;
The pair of blessed luminaries move.
     "The part in me, that sees, and bears the sun,,
The path, that had been yearned for so long,
The people ever, in Palermo rais'd
The pow'r to look on him."  Forthwith I saw
The prayers sent up to God for his release,
The preacher now provides himself with store
The primal virtue, kindling with bright view,
The primal will, that in itself is good,
     "The providence, that governeth the world,
The question, to approve, and not to end it;
The ray and motion of the sacred lights,
The ray, from membrane on to the membrane urg'd;
The ray, that comes from it.  But as the greed
Thereafter men, for ill than good more apt,
There all perfection is vouchsafed; and such
There all things are as they have ever been:
There amidst Albert's works shall that be read,
There are of them, in truth, who fear their harm,
The record sound in this unequal strain.
There ever and anon, outstarting, flew
Therefore I pray the Sovran Mind, from whom
Therefore entreat I, father!  to declare
Therefore the circle, whose swift course enwheels
Therefore, 't is well thou take from me the truth,
Therefore to recollect was I so slow.
Therefore who follow him, as he enjoins,
Therefore your sight, of th' omnipresent Mind
Therefore your steps have wander'd from the paths."
The region of the angels deck'd with them.
There halted, and "Regina Coeli " sang
Therein she resteth, e'en as in his lair
    There is in heav'n a light, whose goodly shine
There shall be read the woe, that he doth work
There shall be seen the Spaniard's luxury,
There stall them and grow fat.  The o'erweening brood,
The rest, that to my wond'ring thoughts l found.
The rest was whiter than the driven snow.
The rest were not an hundredth part so great.
There, under shadow of his sacred plumes
There wheel'd about the point a circle of fire,
There, where thou markest that which thou dost speak,
Therewith agreeing," heard I answer'd, "keep
There would assuredly be room for doubt
There would in thee for wonder be more cause,
The richness of his spring-head: and as sound
The rigid satisfaction.  Then behooved
The rite accepted.  With such mighty sheen
The robe and veil they wear, to that intent,
     The robe, that with its regal folds enwraps
The roots, from whence your operations come,
The rovers' titles--Poverty and Francis.
The Rubicon, was of so bold a flight,
The sacred chords, that are by heav'n's right hand
The sacred stairs are sever'd, as the faith
The sacred strain must leap, like one, that meets
The saintly circles in their tourneying
The saintly creatures flying, sang, and made
The saintly folds, that shaded her fair brows.
The same in all, an holocaust I made
The scripture, condescending graciously
The scripture-image, by distortion marr'd.
The second light: and she, whose gentle love
These ended, to that region, where the world
These eyes are not thy only Paradise."
These hundred years and more, on its first ledge
These once a mortal view beheld.  Desire
The servant, who hath joyful tidings brought,
These spirits stood exculpate.  For the will,
These tokens of pre-eminence on man
The shadow, streaming forth effulgence new,
The shape, which in this mirror shall be shown."
The sheep, meanwhile, poor witless ones, return
The shepherd of the church let this suffice
The shining of a flambeau at his back,
The shout of 'death,' re-echo'd loud and long.
The shuttle to its point.  She thus began:
The sight may without harm endure the change,
The sign, that followeth Taurus, I beheld,
The skillet, that would hold Ferrara's blood,
The skill is look'd into, that fashioneth
     The song fulfill'd its measure; and to us
The songs of the Supreme, himself supreme
The sons have for the sire's transgression wail'd;
The soul of each one, loving, who the truth
The soul of every brute and of each plant,
The source of primal truth it dwells for aye:
The speech descended, the first sounds I heard
The spindle and the flax; O happy they!
The spirit of paternal love, enshrin'd,
The spirits of men contemplative, were all
The spirit to his proem added things
The spirit wholly; thus the hallow'd light,
The splendours shot before me, that I cried,
The spousals were complete 'twixt faith and him,
The stated rounds, that to th' observant eye
The stragglers wander, so much mole they come
The strife of aching vision.  As erewhile,
The substance, that my ken endur'd it not.
The sun-beam glow'd that to mine eyes it came
The sun doth sometimes hide him, safe abides
The sun in his eclipse, and, through desire
The supreme virtue show'r not over all.
     The sweet dame beckon'd me to follow them:
The sweet refreshing, of that heav'nly shower.
The sword of heav'n is not in haste to smite,
Th' eternal Providence, I well discern:
Th' eternal judgment unto mortal ken."
The third in order, underneath her, lo!
The thirsting pride, that maketh fool alike
The thorn frown rudely all the winter long
The thunder doth not lift his voice so high,
The time prepar'd for thee.  Such as driv'n out
The torrent Rhone.  What after that it wrought,
The track, our ventrous keel must furrow, brooks
The tresses from the distaff, lectur'd them
The tribe of lowly ones, that trac'd HIS steps,
The triumph, which plays ever round the point,
The true and false oppos'd.  Soon as my feet
The truth is as thou deem'st; for in this hue
The truth thou lov'st, that thou henceforth alone,
The twain, on each hand next our empress thron'd,
The universal form: for that whenever
The universal frame answers to that,
The universe resemble God.  In this
The universe unfolds; all properties
The unwise passage of Laertes' son,
"The valley' of waters, widest next to that
The vapours, who with us had linger'd late
The vase, wherein time's roots are plung'd, thou seest,
The vengeance were already known to thee,
The virgin's bosom: so that I commend
     "The virtue and motion of the sacred orbs,
The virtue mingled through the body shines,
The virtue of the heaven, and doles out
The visage, Hyperion!  of thy sun;
The vision needs increasing, much increase
The visive spirits dazzled and bedimm'd;
The voice which had dispers'd my fear, when daz'd
The wain, that, in the bosom of our sky,
The walls, for abbey rear'd, turned into dens,
The water shall be chang'd, that laves Vicena
The way of life was follow'd."  Prompt I heard
The way of truth and life, to evil turn'd.
The web is now a-warping.  Feltro too
The which no wish exceeds: and there on earth
The which this priest, in show of party-zeal,
The white grown murky.  Jordan was turn'd back;
The whole.  And of such bond methinks I saw
The widow for her son: now doth he know
The wild beast, soon as she hath reach'd that bound,
The will it had to pleasure me.  The eyes
The will of the Most high; not in such sort
The wolves set on and fain had worried me,
The word of gospel lore upon my mind
     "The works, that follow'd, evidence their truth; "
The world.  Then, circle after circle, round
The world, and with the nearer breath of God
The world possess'd me.  Had the time been more,
The world's deceitfulness, to all who hear him,
The world's enlightener vanishes, and day
The world was in its day of peril dark
"The wound, that Mary clos'd, she open'd first,
The writing must be letters maim'd, that speak
Th' exemplar and its copy: for myself,
They by the measure pac'd, or swift, or slow,
They call it Catria: at whose foot a cell
They came, and stay'd them; uttered them a shout
The yellow lilies, and with partial aim
They emblem: not that, in themselves, the things
They from corruption had been therefore free.
"They hope in thee," first heard we cried: whereto
They lack not weight."  I spake; and on me straight
They live, yet never know satiety,
     They of the circle to that point, each one.
They quitted not their bodies, as thou deem'st,
They scarce would wait to hear the blessing said.
They stand, nor feel to fall.  For do not doubt,
They were, I turn'd mine eyes, and nothing saw;
Th' ideal stamp impress: so that one tree
Things generated, which the heav'nly orbs
Things, that empower thee to sustain my smile."
     "Think now of one, who were a fit colleague,
Th' intention is deriv'd."  Forthwith I heard:
This also I entreat of thee, O queen!
This consistory round about mayst scan,
This council, till the sun had made complete,
This day is mingled with the common herd.
This doth assure me, lady, rev'rently
"This fair assemblage!  stoles of snowy white
This fair dame round, who strengthens thee for heav'n.
This flower to germin in eternal peace!
This for their sphere, but for a sign to thee
This garden through: for so, by ray divine
This harder find to deem, why of thy peers
This he, into whose keeping from the cross
This is the formal cause, that generates
     "This jewel, that is next me in our heaven,
This light from many a star visits my heart,
     "This little star is furnish'd with good spirits,
This of the feet in future to be pierc'd,
This other splendid shape, which thou beholdst
This petty area (o'er the which we stride
This precious jewel, let me hear thy name."
This principle, not understood aright,
This prompts the hearts of mortal animals,
This revelation to us, where he tells
     "This sacrifice in essence of two things
This sphere assign'd, that oft from mortal ken
This star o'ercame me.  Yet I naught repine,
"This stream, and these, forth issuing from its gulf,
This the brute earth together knits, and binds.
This to the lunar sphere directs the fire,
This treasure, such as I describe it to thee,
This truth may stand more clearly in your view,
This way distinction make: e'en so on his,
     "This would'st thou know, if failure of the vow
Thither for succour, where he trusteth most,
Thither the Patriarch Jacob saw it stretch
Those burning splendours of the Holy Spirit
Those burning suns that circled round us thrice,
Those flowers and sparkles, and distinct I saw
Those garlands twain, and to the innermost
     "Those, in the eye who live the first and fifth,
Those penmen, whom the Holy Spirit mov'd
Those rays describ'd the venerable sign,
Those saintly lights attended, happier made
Those tongues to sound, that have on sweetest milk
Those who on either hand may prop and lead them,
Thou arguest; if the good intent remain;
Thou art not on the earth as thou believ'st;
     "Thou art so near the sum of blessedness,"
Thou backward fall'st.  Grace then must first be gain'd;
Thou canst not doubt its fellow's excellence,
Thou compensate the brief delay.  Say then,
Thou didst exalt thy glory to give room
Thou dost unbind me from that beauteous sphere."
Thou fain wouldst hear, what plants are these, that bloom
Though all partake their shining, yet in those
Though conquer'd, by its mercy conquering.
Though gay, yet innocent of worse intent,
Though it have brought destruction on the world.
Though leave were giv'n them, as thou know'st, to change
     Though mainly prompt new question to propose,
Though of mean state and from a foreign land.
Though that beheld most distant do not stretch
Though veil'd themselves in shade; so saw I there
Thou hadst been longer drawing out and thrusting
Thou harbour'st, and from thence the virtue bring'st,
Thou hast allay'd, my son, within this light,
Thou hast good cause to cry, "My heart so cleaves
Thou hast to freedom brought me; and no means,
Thou holdst most certain: for that will I see
Thou in his audience shouldst thereof discourse."
"Thou in thy thought art pond'ring (as I deem,
Thou kingly prudence and that ken mayst learn,
Thou know'st, and how: and knowing hast allay'd
     "Thou know'st, that in the bosom, whence the rib
Thou know'st, who by thy light didst bear me up.
Thou listen to the arguments, which I
Thou mayst be certain, take good lading in.
Thou mov'st to boasting, when I could not choose,
Thou near our city cam'st.  But so was doom'd:
Thou, notwithstanding, all deceit remov'd,
Thou of our beams wouldst borrow for thine aid,
Thou only to this office wert foredoom'd."
Thou reach, expectance may not weary thee,
Thou rest a little longer at the board,
Thousand and hundred years and more, remain'd
Thousand save sev'nty times, the whilst I dwelt
Thousands of angels; in resplendence each
Thou seest, were lowly to confess themselves
Thou shalt behold me of thy favour'd tree
Thou shalt discern it only hath respect
Thou smiledst; on that circling, which in thee
     "Thou, to abate thy wonder, note that none
Thou to whom grace vouchsafes, or ere thy close
Thou utter'st, both in weight and in alloy.
Thou wear this corollary.  Nature ever
Thou, whose broad stamp is on them, higher up
Thou wilt confess not possible, if here
Thou would'st of theft do charitable deed.
Three Persons in the Godhead, and in one
Three mirrors shalt thou take, and two remove
Three orbs of triple hue clipt in one bound:
Through Moses, the rapt Prophets, and the Psalms.
Through Scipio the world's glory unto Rome,
Through all the seven spheres, and saw this globe
Through  different essences, from it distinct,
     Through diver passages, the world's bright lamp
Through glance of sunlight, stream'd through broken cloud,
Through greedy eyes to take the soul withal,
     "Through human wisdom, and th' authority
Through members different, yet together form'd,
Throughout all Paradise, that with the song
Throughout the livelong day.  The common cry,
Throughout the mortal kingdom which it sway'd,
Throughout these orbs, the mountain, and the deep,
Through sharp encounter of the nimble light,
Through silvery whiteness of that temperate star,
Through the blest quire, by Him, who here appoints
Through the deep brine ye fearless may put out
Through the just anger that hath murder'd ye
Through the sleek cov'ring of his furry coat.
Through the vast sea of being, and each one
Through zealous love to Mary: then in view
Th' ungrateful nation, fickle and perverse.
Thus I resolve thee of the greater point.
Thus absolute Piccarda spake, and I
Thus, at the hearing of that pious suit,
Thus benediction uttering with song
Thus by the virtue, not the seeming, breadth
Thus chanting saw I turn that substance bright
Thus closely with thee longer, take at large
     Thus did he come, deducing to this point,
Thus do these organs of the world proceed,
Thus far from round to round.  So heav'n's decree
Thus far hath one of steep Parnassus' brows
Thus heard I one, who spake:  "Since with its beam
Thus he began:  "thou shalt not knowledge gain
Thus in that heav'nly banqueting my soul
Thus in the sun-thaw is the snow unseal'd;
Thus in the winds on flitting leaves was lost
     Thus is one heat from many embers felt,
Thus more than thousand twinkling lustres hence
Thus needs, that ye may apprehend, we speak:
Thus oft are seen, with ever-changeful glance,
     Thus of those piteous spirits one bespake me;
Thus saw I move the glorious wheel, thus heard
     Thus she her words, not heedless of my wish,
Thus they to different havens are mov'd on
Thus up the neck, as it were hollow, rose
Thus vanish'd gradually from my sight
Thus when and where these spirits of love were made,
Thy bounty succours, but doth freely oft
Thy childish judgment; since not yet on truth
Thy daughter by affinity and blood!
Thy deeming and my saying meet in truth,
Thy finger in the fire, than I was, ere
Thy ill-entreating!  and, O blest Navarre!
Thy judgment, that the human nature ne'er
Thy ken directed to the point, whereat
Thy kindred appellation comes, and who,
Thy liberal bounty still toward me keep.
Thy look on me reverteth, was the beam
Thy mind be with thine eyes: and in them mirror'd
Thy mortal puissance would from its rays
Thy motion and thy virtue are begun,
Thy name;' and with my faith who know not that?
Thyself a costly jewel, dost inlay!
Thyself, and all who hear, invigorate
Thy soaring, (if I rightly deem,) than lapse
Thy Son shalt follow, and diviner joy
Thy span beyond their treason's chastisement."
Thy speech hath raised in me; for much I muse,
Thy subtle thoughts have bound thee.  From this realm
Thy thirst is next.  The saintly soul, that shows
Thy thirst, which from the triple question rose.
Thy thirst with drops of sweetness."  Yet blank awe,
Thy thoughts, from whence they rise.  Thou art in doubt,
Thy triumph wholly, if thou waken aught
Thy voice to satisfy my wish untold,
Thy voyage (to which end I was dispatch'd,
Thy will distinctly, utter forth the wish,
Thy wishes, all that in this sphere have birth,
Thy wonder of the mighty Architect,
Till from that verge, each, changing hemisphere,
Till other's tongue reveal them.  Fervent love
Time covers, the first Florentines.  I saw
Time for us with his beam, went circling on
Timely for food of angels, on which here
'T' imprint in me such love: for, of constraint,
T' indulge the fervent wish; and I began:
T' instruct me of its state.  "'Twixt either shore
'Tis darkness all, or shadow of the flesh,
     To Beatrice on my right l bent,
To Belisarius, with whom heaven's right hand
To call things rightly, be it henceforth styl'd.
To calm my troubled mind, before I ask'd,
To certify himself of that reproach,
To Christian, and no miracle been wrought,
To Colchos, wonder'd not as ye will do,
To Cupid and Dione, deem'd of them
To God, befitting the new grace vouchsaf'd.
To God, through whom to this first star we come."
To Nazareth, where Gabriel op'd his wings.
To Simifonte, where his grandsire ply'd
To Simon Magus, where Magna's priest
To aid them in their warfare for the faith.
To any wish by justice introduc'd,
To ask of thee, whom also it delights;
To ask thee of other truth, that yet
To be in charity must needs befall,
To be surpass in fall, as in its rising.
To be the effluence of that heav'n, which thou,
Tobias whole.  Unlike what here thou seest,
To bring Rome in unto the way of life,
To circumscribe his being, as he will'd,
To dally with itself in idle play."
Today's is made tomorrow's destiny.
To do the bidding of my heav'nly guide:
To do thee gentle service.  We are they,
To do what they had gladly left undone,
"To each among your tribe, what time ye kenn'd
To execute the counsel of the Highest.
To execute the vengeance of its wrath.
To exercise his wit."  So breath'd the flame
To first offence the doubting Guenever.
To follow, but not follow them no more;
To furnish out this turn.  Mine eyes did look
Together both, girding the' horizon hang,
To girdle in the sun.  All is one beam,
To give it rule, behold the valorous deeds
To go about the vineyard, that soon turns
To grace his triumph gathers thence a wreath
To have its scepter wielded by a race
To, have struggled in the womb.  Therefore, as grace
To hearing and to sight grateful alike,
To hearken; ye the doubt that urges me
To her, by whom my silence and my speech
To him, that liv'd in solitude remote,
To him.  This wouldst thou hear; how long since God
To him, who heareth not distinct the note;
To him, who subtilizes thus with me,
To his own hand remorseless, to the path,
To his requesting.  I have spoken thus,
To holy church his treasure.  The fifth light,
To human nature is allow'd, must all
To intellectual.  For no other cause
To iron in the furnace, every cirque
To issue, and reflected upwards rise,
To its appointed kingdom, nor would have
To joyous mood, that through the covering shone,
To judge at distance of a thousand miles
To justice and to truth, how might I choose
To keep the bark of Peter in deep sea
To kings, of whom are many, and the good
To know their state.  "O born in happy hour!
To know the rest how sorely thou wouldst crave;
To leave the traces of thy footsteps mark'd!
To linger in dull tardiness, compar'd
To make the better mirrors of mine eyes
To manifest his glory by its beams,
To me, as thoroughly I to thee am known.''
To meet the hard emprize that draws me on.
To me had spoken, and my will declar'd,
To mind, thy wish may be in part fulfill'd:
To mine eyes, that upward, as from vale
To mine he came devolv'd.  Caesar I was,
To mortal men, of hope a living spring.
To mountain sped, at th' extreme bound, a part
To move along the sunbeam, whose slant line
To multiply our loves!" and as each came
To my o'erlabour'd sight: when at the name
To my rapt sight the arctic beams reveal.
To negro blackness change her virgin white.
Took from the adder black and sudden death.
Took in the full dimensions of that joy.
Took the last Signet, which his limbs two years
Took up the strain, and echoed Mary's name.
Took up the strain; and thus it spake again:
To other object, willingly, his view.
To other view excluded, hence of proof
To over-canopy the M. mov'd forth,
To perfect being started, like three darts
To pour their wished influence on the world;
To preach the Gospel, let the gospel sleep,
To put his hand to the first art, Donatus.
To raise ye up, was fain to leave out none,
To Raymond Berenger, and every one
To reappoint), when its imperial Head,
To recompense, who sees and can reward thee.
To reilumine underneath the foot
To render to these heavens: now 't is fall'n
To rise in view; and round the other twain
To rob another, and another sought
To rue the gathering in of their ill crop,
To save them: those first ages past, behoov'd
To save you.  When by evil lust entic'd,
To search the meaning of what here thou seest,
To set the goodly plant, that from the vine,
To shape it in his fantasy again,
To sit in Dido's bosom: and from her,
To slake thy thirst, no less constrained were,
To soar up thither, let him look from thence
To some addition; that thou well, mayst mark
To stand against such outrage on her skill.
To such, as sue for heav'n's sweet sake, and not
To talk yet further with me, and began:
To testify against that evil law,
To that emprize, that first made Neptune wonder
To the chief good; for that its light in him
To the design of art, through sluggishness
To thee for aidance, fain would have desire
To thee, how for three hundred years and more
To thee, who understand'st them not, such is
To the first father of your mortal kind,
To the foremention'd lively knowledge join'd,
To the great supper of the blessed Lamb,
To the redemption of mankind to come;
To the third circle from the highest, there
To the true faith recall'd me.  I believ'd
To think my gladness manifest to thee,
To this perceptible hath lifted thee."
To those celestial lights, that tow'rds us came,
To those who in respect of kindred claim,
To thy perception, where I told thee late
To tread their festal ring; and last the band
To turn the poop, where she hath now the prow;
Touches the sun; so saw I there stream wide
Touching my future destiny have heard
To vital nourishment.  The cry thou raisest,
To vitiate thy beam: so that once more
To wan and wither'd, if not tended well:
Toward me, ready to inflict the blow,
Towards it, deeming it their food; so drew
Toward the bliss supreme.  And I, who ne'er
Toward the lustre, that with greeting, kind
Toward the realm of God's own form, bore us
Toward the sepulchre?  thy will is here,
Toward us mov'd a light, at view whereof
To what I answer thee; and thou shalt see
To what a vile conclusion must thou stoop!
To what intent the eagle of our Lord
     To whom I thus:  "It is enough: no fear,
To whom I turn'd, flashing, bewray'd its will
To whom more guilt and shame are justly due.
To whom she thus:  "O everlasting light
To whom the keys of glory were assign'd.
To whom these days shall be of ancient date."
To whom thou in the world erewhile didst Sing
To whom whate'er of genius lifteth me
To whose sweet anthem all the blissful court,
To win her bridegroom's love at matin's hour,
To yield the shepherd room, pass'd o'er to Greece,
To your perception, hands and feet to God
Trac'd by the generator, still pursue
Trac'd in my thoughts I may set forth to view,
Trangress'd, from these distinctions fell, no less
Translated:  for the star, with warmer smile
Translucent, solid, firm, and polish'd bright,
Transmitted. hierarchy of gods, for aye
Transparent, when to pleasure me it spake:
Transporting from that realm: and of these lights
Tread the light measure, in their fitful mirth
Triangle with each corner, blunt or sharp.
True love must needs ascend with slacker beam.
True love, that ever shows itself as clear
True substances are these, which thou behold'st,
Turn backward, and invert their steps; erelong
Turn'd me toward him; then unto my dame
Turn'd to the mark where greater want impell'd,
Turning the shepherd to a wolf.  For this,
Turning to me, with aspect glad as fair,
Twelve fold to him for ten.  Aged and poor
'T were all too poor to utter the least part
'Twixt Arno and the Tyber, he from Christ
'Twixt banks, on either side, painted with spring,
'Twixt one or other household.  Hence befalls
Two arches parallel, and trick'd alike,
Two champions to the succour of his spouse
Twofold, that circled me, he shall attain
'T would deem the praise, it yields him, scantly dealt."
Unbounded, bounding all, each spirit thrice
Under its wings victorious, Charlemagne
Under the Son of Mary and of God,
Under whose summit thou didst see the light,
Unequal to my theme, as never bard
Unequal to pursue the crowned flame,
Unfathomable, to the end that she,
Unfolded, dashes from the blinding eyes
United, and the foremost rank assign'd.
Unjust, is argument for faith, and not
Unless thou be eked out from day to day,
Unlocks not, surely wonder's weapon keen
Unripen'd for conversion:  back once more
Unshaken:  the Sacchetti still were great,
Unswervingly.  Thus place I in thy sight
Until it pleas'd the Word of God to come
Until the Baptist, fit to carry arms,
Unto eternity, and out of Florence
Unto her young, whom lately she hath fed,
Unto himself in thought:  "And didst thou look
Unto that top.  The next for Charlemagne
Unto the banners, that do levy war
Unto the beautiful garden, blossoming
Unto the holy triumph, for the which
Unto the life, from whence he fell, restor'd:
Unto the mountains that had bow'd them late
Unto the other two, who in a ring
Unto the party injur'd:  but the truth
Unto the race to come, that shall not lose
Unto the region of the highest thunder,
Unto the steadfast dwelling of their joy.
Unto the thousandth parcel of the truth,
Unto the virtue through its parts diffus'd.
Unto the visage most resembling Christ:
Unwelcome, on digestion it will turn
     Unwillingly from question I refrain,
Unwound and tighten'd, flow to righteous prayers
Upholds their nature merely, but in them
Upon Ostiense and Taddeo's page,
Upon its centre whirl'd the light; and then
Upon my praises following, of the eighth
Upon the bosom of our pelican:
Upon the earth.  The language I did use
Upon the glorious vision, from the which
Upon the ladder perch'd the sacred bird.
Upon these waters mov'd the Spirit of God.
Upon the sun.  Much is allowed us there,
Upon the tablet of your mortal mold,
Upon the warp, was woven, I began,
Upon thine image, by no covering veil'd."
Upon this body, which below on earth
Urge equally; and therefore I the first
Urging its arduous matter to the close),
Urging with sacred thirst of sweet desire,
Vanish'd, as heavy substance through deep wave.
Vengeance for vengeance of the ancient sin,
Vicissitude of ministry, enjoin'd;
Victorious he his mighty triumph holds,
Virtues, and powers the third.  The next to whom
Visiting every step.  Looks I beheld,
Vocal and consonant, were five-fold seven.
Voice answ'ring voice, so musical and soft,
Voice there assum'd, and thence along the beak
Void of its family; nor yet had come
Vouchsaf'd me entrance to the lofty wheel
Vouchsaf'd to clothe him in terrestrial weeds.
Vouchsafe one glance to gild our storm below!
Wailings and groans in Famagosta's streets
War once had for its instrument the sword:
Was I releas'd from the deceitful world,
Was Malta's bar unclos'd.  Too large should be
Was Peter, he that with the widow gave
Was William, whom that land bewails, which weeps
Was after the first counsel that Christ gave.
Was answer'd:  "if thou well discern, why first
Was by the eternal Spirit inwreath'd:  and when
Was chang'd (that ever as at first remain'd)
Was chaste and sober, and abode in peace.
Was e'er conceiv'd.  For I beheld and heard
Was found unmov'd at rumour of his voice,
Was honour'd, it, and those consorted with it.
Was hunting; this the priesthood follow'd, that
Was in itself the cause of that exile,
Was in its strength: and to the curule chairs
Was kindled, as I gaz'd.  It may not be,
Was liberty of will, the boon wherewith
Was lighted such a smile, I thought that mine
Was link'd in such conjointment, 't was a sign
Was manifested, as a star in heaven.
Was mighty on their lips; nor needed they,
Was nearest, as partaking most, methinks,
Was not for words to speak, nor memory's self
Was of corporeal frame, and it transcend
Was on its height frequented by a race
Was on its rise, but yet so slight esteem'd,
Was or can be.  For God more bounty show'd.
Was or can be, such as in them it was.
Was painted in my looks; and thus I spake
Was rais'd aloft, and made the guest of heav'n.
Was sever'd, smil'd reminding me of her,
Was she, but smil'd thereat so joyously,
Was shed thence.  As the rooks, at dawn of day
Was silent; for that all those living lights,
Was ta'en to fashion that fair cheek, whose taste
Was tardier in motion; and that glow'd
Was the curst pride of him, whom thou hast seen
Was the reply:  "and what forbade the smile
Was the reply, "that they in very deed
Was, through increase of gladness, thus conceal'd;
Was to their gratulation, silent, each,
Was to the sun, that fills it, turn'd again,
Was won.  And, near unto the other, rests
Was worn away, or ever Nimrod's race
Was worthiest.  The celestial love, that spume
Waxing in splendour, burst forth into songs,
Wax more and more resplendent; and, "Behold,"
Weareth its proper hue of orient light.
Weigh down his eyelids, for that he was son
     "Well I discern," she thus her words address'd,
Well I discern, that by that truth alone
Well pleas'd, and then enfoldeth in his arms
Well squar'd to fortune's blows.  Therefore my will
Were, "Best he thou, Triunal Deity!
Were all too scant, had not the Son of God
Were but the fifth of them this day alive.
Were by enlight'ning grace and their own merit
Were given to no end.  And thence doth doubt
Were in Acone's parish; nor had haply
Were in delusion lost.  These other flames,
Were, in my eyeballs lively portray'd,
Were in one praise concluded, 't were too weak
Were in some part neglected and made void."
Were in the Babylonian exile won,
Were it not thus, these heavens, thou dost visit,
Were its departure distant more or less,
Were lamely so deliver'd; but the East,
Were mov'd to gladness, what then was my cheer,
Were nail'd upon the wood.  But lo!  of those
Were neighbours to you, and that at Galluzzo
Were open'd, Gregory at his error smil'd
Were satisfied to know the lot awaits me,
Were shrin'd within his heart.  And yet there hides
Were sponsors for him more than thousand years
Were such a crystal in the Cancer's sign.
Were to her beauty nothing.  Its boon influence
Were to the church reclaim'd, to my great task,
Were understood, the sophist would want room
Were utter'd.  But that, ere the lofty bound
What Daniel of their thousands hath reveal'd
What blood the sowing of it in the world
What change in thee the song, and what my smile
What circuit thou hast compass'd."  From the hour
What compensation therefore may he find?
Whate'er of light, gratuitous, imparts
Whatever it creates and nature makes."
     Whatever melody sounds sweetest here,
Whatever of buxomness and free delight
Whatever thence immediate falls, is free,
     "What following and in its next bearer's gripe
What hath been told thee.--Lo!  the ambushment
What is by me not hidden."  As a Hood
What is that hope, how it doth flourish in thee,
What marvel, since no eye above the sun
     "What may the Persians say unto your kings,
     What place for entrance Beatrice chose,
What promise thou from hope in chief dost win."
What reason on each side they have to plead,
What reason that another's violence
What space endur'd my season of delight;
What they are, and how grievous their offending,
"What things are these?"  involuntary rush'd,
What though, when tasted first, thy voice shall prove
What thou hast ask'd: for in th' abyss it lies
What time from all these empty things escap'd,
What time the she-goat with her skiey horn
What web it was, through which she had not drawn
What we possess, and nought beyond desire;
Wheel'd, as became their rapture.  In the dance
When I before had cast my view beneath,
When Mary stay'd beneath.  But not to deal
When Prague shall mourn her desolated realm.
Whenas I turn'd me, pleasure so divine
Whenas that gracious boon was proffer'd me,
Whenas the wheel which thou dost ever guide,
When at his daughter's birth the sire grew pale.
When both our parents at the first were made."
Whence I address them:  "O perennial flowers
Whence I my vision, clearer shall before,
Whence I return, are many jewels found,
     Whence I to her replied:  "Something divine
Whence I to question her became less prompt.
     Whence, after utt'rance of a piteous sigh,
Whence flows what most he craves."  Beatrice spake,
Whence needs each lesser nature is but scant
     "Whence, noting that, which I have said, and this,
Whence, on the alter, Iphigenia mourn'd
Whence she, to whom no work of mine was hid,
     Whence she who saw me, clearly as myself,
Whence these our sayings we avouch for good."
Whence they were drawn, their steps had hasten'd back,
Whence truly sprang the wrath that banish'd me;
When death's chill seized her; and that one of them
When, disappearing, from our hemisphere,
When for their stubbornness at Padua's marsh
When from Ravenna it came forth, and leap'd
When from the midmost of this blue abyss
When gold had fail'd them.  Here in synod high
When heav'n was minded that o'er all the world
When he perceiv'd his son.  "O thou, my blood!
(When he was bidden 'Ask' ), the motive sway'd
When his good influence 'gan to bless the earth.
When in the flecker'd dawning he shall spy
When it doth touch the limit of his skill.
When liberty return'd: but in too few
When lo!  as one who, in a mirror, spies
When, looking at my side again to see
When nature gave it to inform her mold:
When on the edge of ruin clos'd thine eye.
When she is ta'en to heav'n."  By words like these
When such life may attend the first.  Yet they
When that the two assemblages shall part;
When the Most Holy suffer'd.  Then the words
When the impregnate air retains the thread,
When the rejected tares in vain shall ask
When they led on by Hannibal o'erpass'd
When they saw Jason following the plough.
When they shall see that volume, in the which
When through the hundredth in his reck'ning drops
When thus I heard: "Wonder not, if my hue
When thus by lady:  "Give thy wish free vent,
When thus her words resuming she began:
When to their view the Lateran arose
When ye were gifted of the Holy Ghost.
Where Anna sits, so well content to look
Where Hector lies; then ill for Ptolemy
(Where I had enter'd), not through change of hue,
Whereby with Christ she mounted on the cross,
Where charity in soft persuasion sat,
Where erst it was, had turn'd; and steady glow'd,
Where flames the arduous Spirit of Isidore,
Wherefore, if I was silent, fault nor praise
Wherefore of grace God op'd in him the eye
Wherefore such disagreement is between
Where for its sake were met the rival three;
Where gainful merchandize is made of Christ,
(Where helice, forever, as she wheels,
Wherein believing, he endur'd no more
Wherein the holy church defended her,
Wherein the love, which ruleth o'er its orb,
Wherein the past is written.  Now were all
Wherein the word divine was made incarnate;
Wherein thou art, impassible and pure,
Wherein thou sittest, by eternal lot!
Where is the justice that condemns him?  where
Where it before was singing, thus began,
Where it doth break its steepness most, arose
Where losing me, perchance ye may remain
Where never any with good will returns,
Where, on the gulf by stormy Eurus lash'd,
Whereon thou lookst, began with such delight,
Whereon to look fulfilleth all desire.
Whereon who feeds hath every wish fulfill'd!
Where our desire did dwell: and round thee so,
Where peace divine inhabits, circles round
Where pledge of mutual safety was exchang'd,
Where springs the pleasant west-wind to unfold
Where those you sprang from, and what years were mark'd
Whereto my ready answer stands decreed."
Wherever merited, celestial light
Where was before th' horizon.  Of that vale
Where well they thrive, not sworn with vanity.
Wherewith I sparkle, equaling with my blaze
Wherewith the Romans over-awed the world,
Wherewith the goodliest sapphire, that inlays
Wherewith your substance blooms, shall stay with you
Whether invisible to eye or no,
Which I had found there, first shone glisteningly,
Which blew the second over Suabia's realm,
Which breathes from both eternal, the first Might
Which bringeth thee so near: and wherefore, say,
Which calls her still to matin prayers and noon,
Which doth disfranchise him, and make unlike
Which doth the earth engarland, shapes its course,
Which falls most heavily on him, who most
Which falls 'twixt other men, the granting shall
Which fashions like itself all lovely things.
Which from a lion of more lofty port
Which from its fairness doth discharge the weight
Which from so deep a fountain doth distil,
Which from the midmost to the bound'ry winds;
Which from the trinal band soft-breathing rose.
Which gave me sov'reignty over the land
Which gives out flame, yet it its whiteness shines
Which grows in transport as we mount aloof.
Which had been fasten'd on him, (he whose end
Which haply vulgar hearts can scarce conceive.
Which he betokens by his radiant seeming.
Which here abides not?  Earth my body is,
Which in his own blood Christ espous'd.  Meanwhile
Which in the final judgment thou shalt see."
Which in the presence of the Son of God
Which is of honour no light argument,
Which is supreme in knowledge and in love
Which its smooth fellies made, is now deserted:
Which kindleth them, decreed.  And when each one
Which late we told of, the great minister
Which lords it o'er me, even at the sound
Which makes me oft to bicker and turn red.
Which merely are from holy thoughts inspir'd!
Which moves thee, is less harmful; for it brings
Which never may be cancel'd from the book,
Which now the dotards hold in such esteem,
Which oft might have perplex'd thee still.  But now
Which paints it, when most dense the vapour spreads,
Which passeth from his brightness; not disjoin'd
Which, so intent to mark it, held me fix'd,
Which so persuade thee, are the voice of heav'n?"
Which the good Father locks from none.  --And thou,
Which this betokens me, admits no doubt."
Which Thomas, ere my coming, hath declar'd
Which thou hadst seen, had that been shaken off.
Which thou hast nam'd, and what of them is made,
Which thou hast such respect of.  In old days,
Which thou inquirest, either in some part
Which thou must witness ere thy mortal hour,
Which through the' etherial concave comes rejoicing."
Which to his gracious pleasure love conforms.
Which took me reading in the sacred book,
Which were vouchsaf'd me, should for ensign serve
Which whelm and sink thee down!  The will in man
Which will give speedy motion to the pen,
While sight was unconsum'd, and, in that depth,
While the everlasting pleasure, that did full
While they with upward eyes do look on her;
While yet a stammerer, with his tongue let loose
Whisper'd the peace and ardour, which they won
Whither the line is drawn.  All natures lean,
Who are the cause of all your ills.  The one
Who brought the soul-subliming truth to man.
Who by the tusk will perish: there be read
Who call 'Christ, Christ,' there shall be many found,
Who canst do what thou wilt!  that in him thou
Who cheer'd me with her comfortable words!
Who deign'st, for me, to quit the pleasant place,
Who did provide Augustin of his lore.
Who didst the largess of our kingly court
Who draws the bound, its limit only known.
Who fishes for the truth and wanteth skill.
Who, for my safety, hast not scorn'd, in hell
Who for such lofty mounting has with plumes
Who, for the love of thing that lasteth not,
Who for the vineyard, which thou wastest, died,
Who from his phial should refuse thee wine
Who had erewhile for me his station mov'd;
Who had so largely promis'd, and with voice
Who haply from Croatia wends to see
Who hath not a believer been in Christ,
Who hath remov'd me from the mortal world.
Who hath vouchsaf'd my asking, spirit blest!
Who in desire or fear doth look for it.
Who in the erring world beneath would deem,
Who in the sight of Him, that seeth all,
Who journey'd on, and knew not whither: so did
Who keepeth even footing with the rest."
Who knew my name were wont to call me Folco:
Who led me unto God, admonish'd:  "Muse
Whole in itself and one, as at the first."
Who, like to scymitars, reflected back
Who loves his work so inwardly, his eye
Whom Christ in his own garden chose to be
Whom I have sung preluding, borrow'd they
Whom at the right wheel thou beheldst advancing,
Whom better it had suited to exclaim,
Who meekly clings to it.  The aim of all
Whom love did melt away, as sun the mist),
Whom nature hath made apt for every change!
Whom she was heavy with, this fire had come,
Who musing, in the world that peace enjoy'd,
Who now is sainted, lighten'd her of me
Who of all spirits hath review'd the state,
Who of his spirit and of his offspring shows;
Who of this light is denizen, that here
Who one commendeth. which of them so'er
Who place obtain for merit of their own,
Who pure intelligence were made: mere power
Who reigneth ever, for the drooping host
Who 'scap'd not envy, when of truth he argued,
Who scarce would grant the heav'nly ministers
Whose affirmation, or denial, is
Whose base affection many a spirit soils,
Whose cough embolden'd (as the story holds)
"Who seest that, which thou didst so believe,
Whose faultering hand is faithless to his skill.
Whose haven erst was with its own blood warm.
(Whose height what reach of mortal thought may soar?)
Whose he was wholly, and so call'd him Dominic.
Whose joy enfolds me: Eli then 't was call'd
Whose leaves or white or dusky never change,
Whose lowest step embosoms such a space
Whose marvellous life deservedly were sung
Whose mortal lives were busied to that end,
Whose path not bending thus, in heav'n above
Whose people, by the shepherd's fault, possess
Whose sixth orb now enfolded us.  I saw,
Whose very cause depends upon its beam."
Whose welcome is the morn and eve his parting,
Who shook the world: nor aught her constant boldness
Who sits so beautiful at Mary's feet.
Who soar'st so high a pitch, thou seest as clear,
Whoso can deem, how fondly I had fed
     Whoso laments, that we must doff this garb
Who so renown'd a nation and two crowns
Who sought God's friendship in the cord: with them
Who spake with me among the other lights
Who speaks of Christ, nor who doth read nor write,
Who still to worth has been a willing stranger.
Who thither carried first the name of Him,
Who through thy mortal weight shall yet again
Who thus in answer spake:  "In him are summ'd,
Who to such good had destin'd him, was pleas'd
Who to the beak is nearest, comforted
"Who turn'd his compass on the world's extreme,
Who vers'd in geometric lore, would fain
"Who voucheth to thee of the works themselves,
Who was chief shepherd, he with warning voice
Who, willing to give proof of diligence,
Who with loud cries was 'spous'd in precious blood,
Who would have all her court be like herself.
"Why dazzlest thou thine eyes in seeking that,
     "Why doth my face," said Beatrice, "thus
Why longer sleepst thou?  Caorsines and Gascona
Will, as 't is ever wont, affix the blame
Will by thy reasoning be destroy'd.  Beside,
Will fit me.  If but seldom, mighty Sire!
Will he the worthless and vile company,
William, and Renard, and Duke Godfrey drew
Will not conceal me long, but thou wilt know
Will not delay its succour: and thou, son,
Will own it equaling the rest.  But now,
Will pardon me for that I leave untold,
Will sink beneath him: such will be his meed."
Wills of his grace that thou, or ere thy death,
Will truck its armour for his lilied shield.
Wilt thou this truth more clearly evidenc'd?"
Wisdom and love were in one measure dealt;
Wistfully on that region, where the sun
Wist what it spake, so deaf'ning was the thunder.
With Beatrice, I thus gloriously
With Verde mingled, to the salt sea-flood.
With Virgil the soul purifying mount,
     With all the heart, and with that tongue which speaks
With all this laughter on its bloomy shores,
With angels laden.  But to mount it now
With clear reply the shadows back, and truth
With complex potency attract and turn.
With dazzled eyes, whilst wond'ring I remain'd,
With equal sum of gratitude: be his
With faith in either view, past or to come,
"With false imagination thou thyself
With finite number infinite conceals.
     With fixed heed, suspense and motionless,
With flame most pure, that to the sparkle' of truth
With fourfold lustre to its orb again,
With gentle voice and mild, such as perhaps
With gestures such as spake a father's love.
With grace at pleasure variously endows.
With greeting such, as Rome, was first to bear,
With her own light makes ever calm the heaven,
With her sweet brood, impatient to descry
With him compos'd the world to such a peace,
With him it ran e'en to the Red Sea coast;
With him of Arca saw, and Soldanieri
With his adulterate money on the Seine,
With hope, that leads to blissful end; declare,
Within itself the ever-during pearl
Within its proper ray the saintly shape
Within its tabernacle, and left dark
With instinct giv'n, that bears it in its course;
With intervenient disk, as she withdrew:
Within that Jovial cresset, the clear sparks
Within the bosom of that mighty sheen,
Within the cloisters, and held firm their heart."
     Within the crystal, which records the name,
     "Within the pearl, that now encloseth us,
Within the range of that unerring bow,
Within, there is the lofty light, endow'd
Within these rays his Maker."  Like the leaf,
Within the span of Juno's messenger,
Within the temple of his vow, looks round
With it mov'd also; and like swiftest sparks,
With its own matter; or, as bodies share
With its sev'n kings conqu'ring the nation round;
With kindly greeting hail'd, extolling both
With lighter probe or deep, touching the faith,
With light so lively, that the tremulous beam
With light supplies them in as many modes,
With loss of other object, forc'd me bend
With love's first flame to glow:  "Brother!  our will
With many strings, a pleasant dining makes
With merer gladness, heard I thus begin:
With miracles and martyrdoms were built.
With opposite motion and, conceiving thus,
With other voice and fleece of other grain
Without a single suitor, till he came.
Without distinction, in each case alike
Without the shadow, whereof late I deem'd
With over-heavy burden.  "Sith our Liege
With pleasure, from the Holy Spirit conceiv'd,
With prompt affection welcometh the guest.
With purpose of my lady to inquire
With sapience so profound, if truth be truth,
With so divine a song, that fancy's ear
With so exceeding fondness, as infus'd
With soul prophetic.  The bright courtesy
With sounds that lull'd the parent's infancy:
With such addition grac'd of loveliness,
With such effectual working, and the good
With such effulgence blazeth, as sends forth
With such inveterate craving."  Straight I saw,
With that excess, to converse urg'd, and spake:
With that of Linus, and of Cletus fed:
With the bright summit of that horn which swells
With the eye's spirit running forth to meet
With their great bridegroom, who accepts each vow,
With them who blush to hear the bushel nam'd.
With the resplendence of her own, that cast
With these and others like to them, I saw
With the short-sighted vision of a span?
With the sun's flame, that rain or flood ne'er made
With the two garments.  So report below."
With unlike wings are fledge.  A mortal I
With unrob'd jerkin; and their good dames handling
With what a such whiteness did it flow,
With which it knits, as life in you is knit.
With whirling speed; and gladness was the scourge
With whom thou must be thrown into these straits.
With ye the parent of all mortal life
Witness'd augmented joy.  Here, reader!  think,
Witness of things, which to relate again
Wond'ring I gaz'd; and admiration still
Wont to believe the dotage of fond love
Words grievous, though I feel me on all sides
Words may not tell of that transhuman change:
Would ask the  guard of braver arms, than such
Would in itself be such a miracle,
Wouldst after all he hath beheld, preserve
Would their effect so work, it would not be
Wrest it a thousand times; for, if it yield
     "Yea," answer'd I;  "nor here a reason needs."
     Ye host of heaven!  whose glory I survey l
Ye mark not, they endure so long, and you
Ye other few, who have outstretch'd the neck.
Yet cloak thou art soon shorten'd, for that time,
Yet envious tongues incited him to ask
Yet envy not thy neighbours: time extends
Yet holds him from observance; for these wheels
Yet in his smile apparent; and thus spake:
Yet in new doubt was I entangled more,
Yet it may chance, erelong, the Vatican,
Yet may I speak; that, as I gaz'd on her,
Yet not for that the bosom's inward veil
Yet not in this our modern phrase, forthwith
Yet not of choice but through necessity
Yet shows the semicircle void, abide
Yet still continued holy), and beneath,
Yet therefore naught the more remov'd her Sight
Yet this, offensive as it is, provokes
Yet to shun peril they have done amiss:
Yield me again some little particle
     "You are my sire," said I, "you give me heart
You raise me.  Through so many streams with joy
Your hearts, and bend your gaze on vanity,
Your love seduces, 't is but that it shows
Your nature, which entirely in its seed
Your right, usurping.  There, by that foul crew
Your station here." Whence she, with kindness prompt,
Yours without veil reflects it.  Ye discern
Your vessel, marking, well the furrow broad
by inward meditations, thus began:
flow merely in her saintly looks it wrought.
from the world, to follow her, when young
had not ill lording which doth spirit up
had wrought, since thus the shout had pow'r to move thee.
'1 have done ill,' than to redeem his pledge
l am exalted to this height of glory,
lied scarce been held entire. Beyond the sev'nth,
l mark; but, who thou art, am still to seek;
